The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Knights of England, France, and Scotland, by 
Henry William Herbert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Knights of England, France, and Scotland

Author: Henry William Herbert

Release Date: April 25, 2018 [EBook #57045]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KNIGHTS--ENGLAND, FRANCE, SCOTLAND ***




Produced by Charlie Howard and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









Transcriber’s Note: Black Letter is indicated by =equals signs=;
italics text is indicated by _underscores_.




  LEGENDS
  OF
  LOVE AND CHIVALRY.


  Knights of England, France, and Scotland.




  THE
  KNIGHTS
  OF
  ENGLAND, FRANCE,
  AND
  SCOTLAND.


  BY
  HENRY WILLIAM HERBERT,

  AUTHOR OF “THE CAVALIERS OF ENGLAND”--“THE ROMAN TRAITOR”--“CROMWELL,”
  “THE BROTHERS”--“CAPTAINS OF THE OLD WORLD,” ETC.


  [Illustration]


  REDFIELD,
  CLINTON HALL, NEW YORK
  1852.




  Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1852,
  BY J. S. REDFIELD,
  in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States,
  in and for the Southern District of New York.


  STEREOTYPED BY C. C. SAVAGE,
  13 Chambers Street, N. Y.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
  LEGENDS OF THE NORMAN CONQUERORS                                     7
    The Saxon’s Oath                                                   9
    The Norman’s Vengeance                                            22
    The Faith of Woman                                                37
    The Erring Arrow                                                  45
    The Saxon Prelate’s Doom                                          61
    The Fate of the Blanche Navire                                    73
    The Saxon’s Bridal                                                85

  LEGENDS OF THE CRUSADERS                                            99
    The Syrian Lady                                                  101
    The Templar’s Trials                                             115
    The Renegado                                                     128

  LEGENDS OF FEUDAL DAYS                                             143
    The False Ladye                                                  145
    The Vassal’s Wife                                                177
    True Love’s Devotion                                             221

  LEGENDS OF SCOTLAND                                                303
    Passages in the Life of Mary Stuart                              305
    Chastelar                                                        305
    Rizzio                                                           323
    The Kirk of Field                                                337
    Bothwell                                                         351
    The Captivity                                                    364
    The Closing Scene                                                378
    Elizabeth’s Remorse                                              393
    The Moorish Father                                               407




LEGENDS

OF

THE NORMAN CONQUERORS.




THE SAXON’S OATH.

    “My tongue hath sworn, but still my mind is free.”


The son of Godwin was the flower of the whole Saxon race. The
jealousies which had disturbed the mind of Edward the Confessor had
long since passed away; and Harold, whom he once had looked upon with
eyes of personal aversion, he now regarded almost as his own son. Yet
still the Saxon hostages--Ulfnoth, and the young son of Swerga, who in
the time of his mad predilection for the Normans, and his unnatural
distrust of his own countrymen, had been delivered for safe keeping
to William, duke of Normandy--still lingered, melancholy exiles, far
from the white cliffs of their native land. And now, for the first time
since their departure, did the aspect of affairs appear propitious for
their liberation; and Harold, brother of one, and uncle of the other,
full of proud confidence in his own intellect and valor, applied to
Edward for permission that he might cross the English channel, and,
personally visiting the Norman, bring back the hostages in honor and
security to the dear land of their forefathers. The countenance of the
Confessor fell at the request; and, conscious probably in his own heart
of some rash promise made in days long past, and long repented, to the
ambitious William, he manifested a degree of agitation amounting almost
to alarm.

“Harold,” he said, after a long pause of deliberation--“Harold, my son,
since you have made me this request, and that your noble heart seems
set on its accomplishment, it shall not be my part to do constraint
or violence to your affectionate and patriotic wishes. Go, then, if
such be your resolve, but go without _my_ leave, and contrary to _my_
advice. It is not that I would not have your brother and your kinsman
home, but that I do distrust the means of their deliverance; and sure I
am, that should you go in person, some terrible disaster shall befall
ourselves and this our country. Well do I know Duke William; well do I
know his spirit--brave, crafty, daring, deep, ambitious, and designing.
You, too, he hates especially, nor will he grant you anything, save at
a price that shall draw down an overwhelming ruin on you who pay it,
and on the throne of which you are the glory and the stay. If we would
have these hostages delivered at a less ransom than the downfall of our
Saxon dynasty--the misery of merry England--another messenger than thou
must seek the wily Norman. Be it, however, as thou wilt, my friend, my
kinsman, and my son.”

Oh, sage advice, and admirable counsel! advice how fatally
neglected--counsel how sadly frustrated! Gallant, and brave, and young;
fraught with a noble sense of his own powers, a full reliance on his
own honorable purposes; untaught as yet in that, the hardest lesson
of the world’s hardest school, distrust of others, suspicion of all
men--Harold set forth upon his journey, as it were, on an excursion
in pursuit of pleasure. Surrounded by a train of blithe companions,
gallantly mounted, gorgeously attired, with falcon upon fist, and
greyhounds bounding by his side, gayly and merrily he started, on
a serene autumnal morning, for the coast of Sussex. There he took
ship; and scarcely was he out of sight of land, when, as it were at
once to justify the words of Edward, the wind, which had been on
his embarkation the fairest that could blow from heaven, suddenly
shifted round, the sky was overcast with vast clouds of a leaden
hue, the waves tossed wildly with an ominous and hollow murmur; and,
ere the first day had elapsed, as fierce a tempest burst upon his
laboring barks as ever baffled mariner among the perilous shoals and
sandbanks of the narrow seas. Hopeless almost of safety, worn out
with unaccustomed toil and hard privations, for three days and as
many nights they battled with the stormy waters; and on the morning
of the fourth, when the skies lightened, and the abating violence of
the strong gales allowed them to put in, and come to anchor, where
the Somme pours its noble stream into the deep, through the rich
territories of the count of Ponthieu, they were at once made prisoners,
robbed of their personal effects, held to a heavy ransom, and cast as
prisoners-of-war into the dungeon-walls of Belram, to languish there
until the avarice of the count Guy should be appeased with gold.

Still Harold bore a high heart and a proud demeanor, bearding the
robber-count even to his teeth, set him at defiance, proclaiming
himself an embassador from England to the duke of Normandy, and
claiming as a right the means of making known to William his
unfortunate condition. This, deeming it perchance his interest so to
do, the count at once conceded; and before many days had passed, Harold
might see, from the barred windows of his turret-prison, a gallant band
of lancers, arrayed beneath the Norman banner, with a pursuivant and
trumpet at their head, wheeling around the walls of the grim fortress.
A haughty summons followed, denouncing “the extremities of fire and
of the sword against the count de Ponthieu, his friends, dependants,
and allies, should he not instantly set free, with all his goods and
chattels, his baggage and his horses, friends, followers, and slaves,
unransomed with all honor, Harold, the son of Godwin, the friend and
host of William, high and puissant duke of Normandy!” Little, however,
did mere menaces avail with the proud count de Ponthieu; nor did the
Saxon prince obtain his liberty till William had paid down a mighty
sum of silver, and invested Guy with a magnificent demesne on the rich
meadows of the Eaune.

Then once more did the son of Godwin ride forth a freeman, in the
bright light of heaven, escorted--such were the strange anomalies
of those old times--by a superb array of lances, furnished for his
defence by the same count de Ponthieu, who, having held him in vile
durance until his object was obtained, as soon as he was liberated on
full payment of the stipulated price, had thenceforth treated him as
a much-honored guest, holding his stirrup at his castle-gate when he
departed, and sending a strong guard of honor to see him in all safety
over the frontier of the duke’s demesne. Here, at the frontier town,
William’s high senechal attended his arrival; and gay and glorious was
his progress through the rich fields of Normandy, until he reached
Rouen. The glorious chase--whether by the green margin of some brimful
river they roused the hermit-tyrant of the waters, that noblest of the
birds of chase, to make sport for their long-winged falcons, or through
the sere trees of the forest pursued the stag or felon wolf with horn,
hound, and halloo--diversified the tedium of the journey; while every
night some feudal castle threw wide its hospitable gates to greet with
revelry and banqueting the guest of the grand duke. Arrived at Rouen,
that powerful prince himself, the mightiest warrior of the day, rode
forth beyond the gates to meet the Saxon; nor did two brothers long
estranged meet ever with more cordiality of outward show than these,
the chiefs of nations long destined to be rival and antagonistic, till
from their union should arise the mightiest, the wisest, the most
victorious, and enlightened, and free race of men, that ever peopled
empires, or spread their language and their laws through an admiring
world. On that first meeting, as he embraced his guest, the princely
Norman announced to him that his young brother and his nephew were
thenceforth at his absolute disposal.

“The hostages are yours,” he said--“yours, at your sole request; nor
would I be less blithe to render them, if Harold stood before me
himself a landless exile, than as I see him now, the first lord of a
powerful kingdom, the most trusty messenger of a right noble king. But,
of your courtesy, I pray you leave us not yet awhile; though if you
will do so, my troops shall convey you to the seashore, my ships shall
bear you home!--but, I beseech, do this honor to your host, to tarry
with him for a little space: and as you be the first--for so you are
reported to us--in all realities and sports of Saxon warfare, so let us
prove your prowess, and witness you our skill, in passages of Norman
chivalry.”

In answer to this fair request, what could the Saxon do but acquiesce?
Yet, even as he did so, the words of the gray-headed king came sensibly
upon his memory, and he began to feel as if in truth the net of the
deceiver were already round about him with its inevitable meshes.
Still, having once assented, nothing remained for him but to fulfil,
as gracefully as possible, his half-unwilling promise. So joyously,
however, were the days consumed--so gayly did the evenings pass, among
festivities far more refined and delicate than were the rude feasts of
the sturdy Saxons, wherein excess of drink and vulgar riot composed
the chief attractions--that, after one short week had flown, all the
anxieties and fears of Harold were lost in admiration of the polished
manners of his Norman hosts, and the high qualities of his chief
entertainer. From town to town they passed in gay cortége, visiting
castle after castle in their route, and ever and anon testing the valor
and the skill each of the other, in those superb encounters of mock
warfare--the free and gentle passage of arms--which in the education
of the warlike Normans were second only to the real shock of battle,
which was to them, not metaphorically, the very breath of life.

Nor in these jousts and tournaments, whether with headless lance or
blunted broadsword, or in the deadlier though still amicable strife
at _outrance_, did not the Saxon, though unused to the menêge of
the destrier and equestrian combat with the lance, win high renown
and credit with his martial hosts. The Saxon tribes had, from their
earliest existence as a people, been famed as infantry; their arms, a
huge and massive axe; a short, sharp, two-edged sword, framed like the
all-victorious weapon of the Romans; a target, and ponderous javelin,
used ever as a missile. Cavalry, properly so called, although their
leaders sometimes rode into the conflict, they had none; and by a
natural consequence, one of that people for the first time adopting
the complete panoply, mounting the barbed war-horse, and tilting with
the long lance of the Gallic chivalry, must have engaged with the
practised champions of the time at a fearful disadvantage. Still, even
at this odds, such was the force of emulation acting upon a spirit
elastic, vigorous, and fiery, backed by a powerful and agile frame,
inured to feats of strength and daring, that little time elapsed ere
Harold could abide the brunt of the best lance of William’s court, not
only without the risk of reputation, but often at advantage. After a
long and desperate encounter, wherein the Saxon prince had foiled all
comers, hurling three cavaliers to earth with one unsplintered lance,
William, in admiration of his bravery, insisted on bestowing on his
friend, with his own honored blade, the accolade of knighthood--buckled
the gilded spurs upon his heels; presented him with the complete
apparel of a knight--the lance, with its appropriate bandrol--the huge,
two-handed war-sword; and, above all, the finest charger of his royal
stables, which, constantly supplied from the best blood of Andalusia,
at that time were esteemed the choicest stud in Europe. It may now be
supposed that honors such as these, coming too from a Norman, for
the most part esteemed the scorner of the Saxon race--nor this alone,
but from the most renowned and famous warrior of the day--produced a
powerful effect on the enthusiastic and ambitious spirit of the young
Englishman; nor did the wily duke fail to observe the operation of his
deep-laid manœuvres, nor, when observed, did he neglect by every means
to strengthen the impression he had made. To this end, therefore, not
courtesies alone, nor the high-prized distinctions of military honor,
nor gorgeous gifts, nor personal deference, were deemed sufficient
instruments. To finish what he had himself so well begun, to complete
the ensnarement of the Saxon’s senses, the aid of woman was called
in--woman, all-powerful, perilous, fascinating woman! Nor did he lack
a fair and willing bait wherewith to give his prize. In his own court,
filled as it was with the most lovely, or at least--thanks to the
prowess of the Norman spear--the most renowned of Europe’s ladies,
there was not one that could compete in beauty, wit, or grace, with
Alice, his bright daughter. Too keen a player with the passions and the
characters of men--too wise a judge of that most wondrous compound,
that strange mass of inconsistencies, of evil and of good, of honor and
deceit, the human heart--too close a calculator of effects and causes,
was William, to divulge his purpose, or to hint his wishes, even to the
obedient ear of Alice. He cared not--he--whether she loved, or feigned
to love, so that his object was effected. Commanding ever his wildest
passions, using them but as instruments and tools to bend or break men
to his purposes, he never dreamed or recked of their ungovernable force
upon the minds of others. It was but a few days after the arrival of
his guest, that he discovered how he gazed after, and with signs of
evident and earnest admiration, on the young damsel, to whose intimacy
he had been studiously admitted as an especial and much-honored friend
of his host: and her father, to fan this flame on Harold’s part, it
needed little art from so consummate an intriguer as the duke; while as
to Alice, young as she was, and thoughtless, delighted with attention,
and attracted by the fine form and high repute of the young stranger,
and yet more by the raciness and trifling singularities of his foreign
though high-bred deportment--a fond, paternal smile, and an approving
glance, as she toyed with her young admirer, sufficed to give full
scope to her vivacious inclinations.

Daily the Norman’s game became more intricate, daily more certain; when
suddenly, just as the Saxon--flattered and half-enamored as he was,
began to feel that he had no excuse for lingering longer at a distance
from his country and his sovereign--began to speak of a return before
the setting-in of winter, an accident occurred, which, with his wonted
readiness of wit, William turned instantly to good account.

The ducal territories, which had descended to the Norman line from
their first champion, Rollo, were separated by the small stream of
Coësnor from the neighboring tract of Brittany, to which all the
succeeding princes had possessed a claim since Charles the Simple,
in the treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte, had ceded it to that great
duke, the founder of the Norman dynasty. The consequence of this
pretence--for such in fact it was--were endless bickerings, small
border wars, aggressions and reprisals, burnings, and massacres, and
vengeance! Some trivial skirmish had occurred upon this frontier, just
as the duke had perceived that he must either suffer Harold to depart
before his projects were accomplished, or force him to remain by open
violence. In such a crisis he resolved at once upon his line of action;
and, instantly proclaiming war, he raised the banner of his dukedom,
summoned his vassals, great and small, to render service for their
military tenures; and in announcing to his guest his march against the
forces of his hereditary foe, claimed his assistance in the field as
a true host from his well-proved guest, and a godfather-in-arms from
the son whom he had admitted to the distinguished honor of the knightly
accolade. Intoxicated with ambition and with love, madly desirous of
acquiring fame among the martial Normans, and fancying, with a vanity
not wholly inexcusable, that he was doing service to his country in
acquiring the respect of foreign powers, he met half-way the proffer.
And, in the parlance of the day, right nobly did he prove his gilded
spurs of knighthood. In passing the Coësnor, which, like the See,
the Seluna, and the other streams that cross the great Grêve of St.
Michel, is perilous from its spring-tide and awful quicksands, Harold
displayed, in recovering several soldiers, who, having quitted the
true line of march, were on the point of perishing, a noble union of
intrepidity and strength.

During the whole course of the war, the Norman and his guest had but
one tent and one table; side by side in the front of war they charged
the enemy, and side by side they rode upon the march, beguiling the
fatigue and labor with gay jests or graver conversation: and now so
intimate had they become, so perfect was the confidence reposed by
the frank Englishman in his frank-seeming friend, that the sagacious
tempter felt the game absolutely in his power, and waited but a fitting
opportunity for aiming his last blow. Nor was it long ere the occasion
he had sought, occurred. Some brilliant exploits, performed in the
last skirmish of the campaign, by the intended victim of his perfidy,
gave him a chance to descant on the national and well-proved hardihood
and valor of this Saxon race. Thence, by a stroke of masterly and
well-timed tact, he touched upon the beauties, the fertility, the noble
forests, and the rich fields of England--the happy days which he had
passed amid the hospitalities of that fair island. The praises of the
reigning monarch followed, a topic wherein Harold freely and eagerly
united with his host.

“You were but young in those days,” William continued, “and scarce,
I trow, can recollect the scenes which to my older memory are but as
things of yesterday. Then, then, indeed, our races were at variance,
and your good sire--peace to his soul!--worked me and mine sore scathe
and trouble. Yet was it natural, most natural! For in those times
your excellent and venerable king--long may he sway the sceptre he
so honors!--lived with me upon terms of the most close and cordial
friendship. Ay, in good sooth, we were as two brothers--living beneath
the same roof, eating of the same board, and drinking from one cup!
Not thou and I, my Harold, are more sure comrades. Ay! and he promised
me--this in thy private ear--if ever he should gain the throne of
England, to leave me by his will, in default of his own issue, heir to
that noble kingdom. I doubt not of his troth nor loyalty, though it is
years since we spoke of it. You have more lately been about him: hast
ever heard him speak of it? What thinkest thou of his plighted faith?
He is not one, I do believe, to register a vow in heaven, and fall from
it!”

Taken thus by surprise, annoyed and much embarrassed by the turn their
converse had thus taken, Harold turned pale, and actually stammered, as
he made reply:--

“He never had presumed to question his liege lord and king on matters
of such import. The king had never dropped the slightest hint to him
concerning the succession. If he had sworn, doubtless he would perform
his oath: he was famed, the world over, for his strict sanctity; how,
then, should he be perjured? He doubted not, had he so promised, the
duke would have no reason to complain of any breach of faith in good
King Edward’s testament.”

“Ay! it is so,” said William, musingly, as it appeared to Harold,
although in truth his every word had been premeditated long before. “I
had so hoped it would be; and, by my faith, right glad am I that you
confirm me in mine aspirations. By your aid, my good friend--with the
best Saxon on my side--all else is certain; and by my faith, whatever
you shall ask of me, were it my daughter’s hand in marriage, surely it
shall be yours when I am king of England!”

Again the words of the Confessor flashed on the mind of the ill-fated
Saxon, and he foresaw at once the terrible result of this unwilling
confidence. At the same time he saw no means of present extrication,
and, with an air of evident embarrassment, he answered in words
half-evasive, yet sufficiently conclusive, as he hoped, to stop,
for the time being, the unpleasing topic. But this was far from the
intent of William, who, having read with an intuitive and almost
supernatural sagacity the thought that flashed across the brain of
Harold, determined that he should commit himself in terms decisive, and
admitting of no dubious explanation. Taking it, then, for granted that
he had replied fully in the affirmative--

“Since, then,” he said, “you do engage so loyally to serve me, you
shall engage to fortify for me the castle on the heights of Dover; to
dig in it good wells of living water; and, at my summons, to surrender
it! You shall give me your sister, that she may be espoused unto the
noblest of my barons; and you shall have to wife my daughter Alice:
some passages, I trow, have gone between ye ere now. Moreover, as a
warrant of your faith, your brother Ulfnoth shall yet tarry with me;
and when I come to England to possess my crown, then will I yield him
to you!”

In all its force, the madness of his conduct now glared upon the very
soul of Harold. He saw the guilt he had incurred already; the peril he
had brought upon the kinsmen he had come to save; the wo that might
result to his loved country! But, seeing this, he saw no better means
than to feign acquiescence with this unworthy project, holding himself
at liberty to break thereafter an unwilling promise.

No more was said upon the subject. They rode onward as before, but the
light-hearted pleasure of the Saxon was destroyed; and though the great
duke feigned not to perceive the changed mood of his comrade, he had
resolved already that he should yet more publicly commit himself ere he
should leave the realm.

At Avranches, but three days after their discourse, William convoked a
grand assembly of his lords and barons--the mightiest and the noblest
of his vavasours and vassals--the pride of Normandy. There, in the
centre of the hall, he caused an immense chest to be deposited, filled
to the very brim with the most holy relics--bones of the martyred
saints--fragments of the true cross--all that was deemed most sacred
and most awful by the true-hearted catholic--and covered with a superb
cloth of gold, as though it were an ordinary slab or table. There,
seated in high state, upon his chair of dignity--a drawn sword in his
hand, wearing his cap of maintenance, circled by _fleurs-de-lis_,
upon his head, and clad in ermined robes of state--he held _cour
pleusêre_ of his nobles. The Saxon stood among them, honored among the
first at all times, and now the more especially distinguished, that
it was his farewell reception previous to his departure for England.
After presenting him with the most splendid gifts, and making the
most liberal professions of attachment, “Harold,” exclaimed the duke,
“before we part, I call on you, before this noble company, here to
confirm by oath your promise made to me three days since, ‘to aid me in
obtaining, after the death of Edward, the throne and crown of England;
to take my daughter Alice to wife; and to send me your sister hither,
that I may find for her a princely spouse among my vavasours!’”

Taken a second time at fault, and daring not thus openly to falsify
his word--but with a blank and troubled aspect, unsatisfied with his
internal reservation, and conscious of his perjury--Harold laid both
his hands on two small reliquaries which lay, as if by chance, upon
the cloth of gold; and swore, provided he should live, to make good
all those promises--“so might God aid him.” And with one deep, solemn
acclamation, the whole assembly echoed those last words: “So may God
aid him! may God aid! God aid!” At the same instant, on a signal
from the duke, the cloth of gold was drawn aside, and Harold saw the
sacrilege he must commit, so deeply sworn on things so holy, should he
repent, or falsify his oath! He saw, and shuddered visibly, as though
he had been stricken by an ague; yet presently, by a powerful effort,
rallying all his courage to his aid, he made his last farewells,
departed, loaded with gifts and honors, but with a melancholy heart;
and sailed immediately for England, leaving the brother, for whose
liberty he came a suitor, ten times more deeply forfeit than he had
been before. On his first interview with Edward, he related all that
had occurred--even his own involuntary oath. And the old sovereign
trembled, and grew pale, but manifested nothing of surprise or anger!

“I knew it,” he replied, in calm but hollow tones; “I knew it, and I
did forewarn you, how that your visit to the Norman should bring misery
on you, and ruin on our country! As I forewarned you, so has it come to
pass! So shall it come to pass hereafter, till all hath been fulfilled:
God only grant that I live not to see it!”




THE NORMAN’S VENGEANCE.

   “God and good angels fight on _William’s_ side,
    And _Harold_ fall in height of all his pride.”--SHAKSPERE.


Edward the Confessor was dead; and dying, had bequeathed the crown
of merry England to Harold, son of Godwin, destined, alas! to be the
last prince of the Saxon race who should possess the throne of the
fair island. The oath which he had sworn to William, duke of Normandy,
engaging to assist him in obtaining that same realm, which had now
fallen to himself, alike by testament of the late king, and by election
of the people, dwelt not in the new monarch’s bosom! Selfishness
and ambition, aided, perhaps, and strengthened by the suggestions
of a sincere patriotism, that whispered to his soul the baseness of
surrendering his countrymen, their lives, their liberties, their
fortunes, and his loved native land, into the stern hands of a foreign
ruler, determined him to brave the worst, rather than keep the oath,
which, with its wonted sophistry, self-interest was ready to represent
involuntary and of no avail. Not long, however, was he allowed to
flatter himself with hopes that the tempest, excited by his own weak
duplicity, might possibly blow over. The storm-clouds were already
charged with thunder destined to burst almost at once on his devoted
head. The cry of warfare had gone forth through Christendom; the pope
had launched the dreadful bolt of interdict and excommunication against
the perjured Saxon, and all who should adhere to him in his extremity;
nay, more, had actually granted to the Norman duke, by virtue of his
holy office as God’s vicegerent and dispenser of all dignities on
earth, the sovereignty of the disputed islands. In token of his perfect
approbation of the justice of his cause, the Roman pontiff had sent,
moreover, to the duke, a ring of gold, containing an inestimable relic,
a lock of hair from the thrice-mitred temples of St. Peter, the first
Roman bishop; a consecrated banner blest by himself--the same which had
been reared, in token of the greatness and supremacy of holy church, by
those bold Normans, Raoul and William of Montreuil, above the captured
battlements of every tower and castle through the bright kingdom of
Campania. Thus doubly armed, once by the justice of his cause, and yet
more strongly by the sanction of the church, the bold duke hesitated
not to strive by force of arms to gain that rich inheritance, which he
had hoped to win by the more easy agency of guile and of persuasion.

A herald, sent, with a most noble train, bore William’s terms to the
new monarch. “William, the duke of Normandy,” he said, boldly, but with
all reverence due to his birth and present station, “calls to your
memory the oath, which you swore to him by your hand and by your mouth,
on good and holy relics!”

“True it is,” answered Harold, “that I did so swear; but under force I
did so, not by free will of mine! Moreover, I did promise that which
’twas not mine to grant. My royalty belongs not to myself, but to my
people, in trust of whom I hold it. I may not yield it but at their
demand; let them but second William, and instantly the crown he seeks
for shall be his! Farther, without my people’s leave, I may not wed a
woman of a stranger race. My sister, whom he would have espoused unto
the noblest of his barons--she hath been dead a year. Will he, that I
should send her corpse?”

A little month elapsed, and during that brief interval, Harold
neglected nothing that might preserve the crown he had determined
never, except with life, to yield to his fierce rival. A powerful fleet
was instantly appointed to cruise upon the Downs, and intercept the
French invaders; a mighty army was collected on the coast, and each and
all the Saxon landholders, nobles, and thanes, and franklins, bound
themselves by strong oaths “never to entertain or truce, or treaty,
with the detested Normans, but to die freemen, or freemen to conquer.”

A second time the herald came in peace, demanding, in tones fair and
moderate, that Harold, if he might not keep _all_ the conditions of
his oath, would fulfil part, at least, and wed Alice, his betrothed
wife already, the daughter of the puissant duke, who, thereupon, would
yield to him, as being his daughter’s dower, all right and title to the
crown, which he now claimed as his by heritage.

Harold again returned a brief and stern refusal; resolved, that as
he would not yield the whole, he would not, by conceding part, risk
the alienation of the love--which he possessed in an extraordinary
degree--of the whole English people. Then burst the storm at once. From
every part of Europe, where the victorious banners of the Normans were
spread to the wind of heaven, adventurers flocked to the consecrated
standard of their kinsman.

Four hundred vessels of the largest class, and more than twice that
number of the transports of the day, were speedily assembled in the
frith of Dives, a stream which falls into the sea between the Seine
and Orne. There, for a month or better, by contrary winds and furious
storms, they were detained inactive. At length, a southern breeze rose
suddenly, and by its aid they made the harbor of Saint Valery; but
there, again, they were detained by times more stormy than before; and,
superstitious as all men of that period were, the soldiers soon began
to tremble and to murmur; strange tales of dreams, and prodigies were
circulated, and the spirit of that vast host, of late so confident and
proud, sank hourly. At length, whether at the instigation of their own
fanatical belief, or as a last resource, or hoping to distract the
minds of men from gloomier considerations, the Norman chiefs appointed
a procession round the harbor of Saint Valery; bearing the holiest
relics, and among them, the bones of the good saint himself, the patron
and nomenclator of the town; and ere the prayers were ended, lo! the
wind shifted once again, and now blew steadily and fair, swelling the
canvass with propitious breath, and driving out each vane and streamer
at full length, toward their destined port.

The same storm, which had held William on his Norman coast, windbound
and motionless, which he had cursed as unpropitious and disastrous,
fifty times every day, for the last month, had been, in truth--so
little is the foresight, and so ignorant the wisdom even of the most
sagacious among mortals--had been, in truth, the agent by which his
future conquest was to be effected. Those gales which pent the Norman
galleys in their harbors, had forced the English fleet, shattered and
storm-tossed, to put in for victuals and repairs, leaving the seas
unguarded to the approach of the invaders. Nor was this all! Those
self-same gales had wafted from the northward another fleet of foemen,
the Norwegian host of the bold sea-king, Harold Hardrada, and the
treacherous Tosti, the rebel brother of the Saxon monarch. Debarking in
the Humber, they had laid waste the fertile borders of Northumberland
and Yorkshire; had vanquished, in a pitched battle, Morcar and Edwin,
and the youthful Waltheof--who had made head against them with their
sudden levies, raised from the neighboring countries--had driven
them into the walls of York, and there were now besieging them with
little hope of rescue or relief. Meanwhile, the king, who had, for
months, been lying in the southern portion of the realm, in Essex,
Kent, or Sussex, awaiting, at the head of the best warriors of his
kingdom, the arrival of his most inveterate foeman--summoned by news
of this irruption, unexpected, yet, as it seemed most formidable, into
his northern provinces, lulled into temporary carelessness by the
long tarrying of his Norman enemy; and hoping, as it indeed seemed
probable, that the prevailing wind would not change so abruptly,
but that he might, by using some extraordinary diligence and speed,
attack and overpower the besieging force at York, and yet return to
Dover in time to oppose, with the united force of his whole nation,
the disembarkation of the duke--had left his post and travelled with
all speed toward York, leading the bravest and best-disciplined of
his army against the fierce Norwegians, while the shores of Sussex
remained comparatively naked and defenceless. A bloody and decisive
battle fought at the bridge of Staneford, over the river Derwent,
rewarded his activity and valor--a battle in which he displayed no
less his generalship and valor, than the kind generosity and mercy
of his nature. Riding, himself, in person, up to the hostile lines,
before the first encounter, sheathed in the complete armor of the
Norman chivalry--which, since his visit to the continent, he had
adopted--“Where,” he cried, in his loudest tones, “is Tosti, son of
Godwin?”

“Here stands he,” answered the rebel, from the centre of the Norwegian
phalanx, which, with lowered spears, awaited the attack.

“Thy brother,” replied Harold, concealed by the frontlet of his barred
helmet from all recognition, “sends thee his greeting--offers thee
peace, and friendship, and all thine ancient honors.”

“Good words!” cried Tosti, “mighty good, and widely different from the
insults he bestowed on me last year! But if I should accept the offer,
what will he grant to Harold, son of Sigurd?”

“Seven feet of English earth,” replied the king; “or, since he be
gigantic in his stature, he shall have somewhat more!”

“Let Harold, then address himself to battle,” answered Tosti. “None
but a liar ever shall declare that Tosti, son of Godwin, has played a
traitor’s part to Harold, son of Sigurd!”

There was no more of parley. With a shock, that was heard for leagues,
the hosts encountered; and in the very first encounter, pierced by an
arrow in the throat, Hardrada fell, and to his place succeeded that
false brother and rebellious subject, Tosti, the Saxon. Again the
generous Harold offered him peace and liberal conditions! again his
offers were insultingly rejected! and once again, with a more deadly
fury than before, the armies met, and, this time, fought it out, till
not a leader or a chief of the Norwegian host was left alive, save
Olaf, Harold’s son, and the prince bishop of the Orkneys--Tosti,
himself, having at length obtained the fate he merited so richly. A
third time peace and amity were offered, and now they were accepted;
and swearing friendship to the English king for ever, the Norsemen left
the fatal land, whereon yet weltered in their gore their king, the
noblest of their chiefs, and twice five thousand of the bravest men of
their brave nation. But glorious as that day was justly deemed--and
widely as it was sung and celebrated by the Saxon bards--perfect as was
the safety which it wrought to all the northern counties--and freely
as it suffered Harold to turn his undivided forces against whatever
foe might dare set hostile foot on English soil inviolate--still was
that day decisive of his fate!--decisive of the victory of William,
whose banners were already floating over the narrow seas in proud
anticipation of their coming triumph!

It was a bright and beauteous morning in September, when the great
fleet of William put to sea, the galley of the grand duke leading.
She was a tall ship, of the largest tonnage then in use, well manned,
and gallantly equipped; from the main-topmast streamed the consecrated
banner of the pope, and from her peak, a broad flag with a blood-red
cross. Her sails were, not as now, of plain white canvass, but
gorgeously adorned with various colors, and blazoned with the rude
incipient heraldry, which, though not then a science, was growing
gradually into esteem and use. In several places might be seen depicted
the three Lions, which were even then the arms of Normandy; and on her
prow was carved, with the best skill of the French artist, a young
child with a bended bow, and a shaft quivering on the string. Fair
blew the breeze, and free the gallant ship careered before it--before
the self-same wind which at the self-same moment was tossing on its
joyous pinions the victorious banners of the Saxon king. Fair blew
the breeze, and fast the ship of William sped through the curling
billows--so fast that, ere the sun set in the sea, the fleet was hull
down in the offing, though staggering along under all press of sail.
Night sank upon the sea; and faster flew the duke; and as the morning
broke, the chalky cliffs of Albion were in full view, at two or three
leagues distance. William, who had slept all that night as soundly and
as calmly as a child, stood on the deck ere it was light enough to see
the largest object on the sea, one mile away. His first glance was
toward the promised land, he was so swiftly nearing; his second, toward
the offing, where he hoped to see his gallant followers. Brighter and
brighter grew the morning, but not a speck was visible upon the clear
horizon. “Up to the topmast, mariners,” cried the bold duke; “up to the
topmast-head! And now what see ye?” he continued, as they sprang up in
rapid emulation to that giddy height.

“Naught,” cried the first--“naught but the sea and sky!”

“Anchor, then--anchor, presently; we will await their coming, and in
the meanwhile, Sir Seneschal, serve us a breakfast of your best, and
see there be no lack of wines, the strongest and the noblest!” and,
on the instant, the heavy plunge was heard of the huge anchor in the
deep; the sails were furled; and like a living creature endowed with
intellect, and moving by volition, the gallant ship swung round,
awaiting the arrival of her consorts.

The feast was spread, and, from the high duke on the poop to the most
humble mariner on the forecastle, the red wine flowed for all in
generous profusion. Again a lookout was sent up, and now he cried, “I
see far, far, to seaward, the topsails of four vessels.” A little pause
consumed in revelry and feasting, and once again the ship-boy climbed
the mast. “I see,” he said, the third time, “a forest on the deep, of
masts and sails!”

“God aid! God aid!” replied the armed crew--“God aid!” and, with the
word, again they weighed the anchor, and, ere three hours had passed,
the whole of that huge armament rode at their moorings off the beach at
Pevensey.

There was no sign of opposition or resistance; and on the third day
after Harold’s victory at Staneford, the Norman host set foot on
English soil. The archers were the first to disembark--armed with
the six-foot bows, and cloth-yard shafts, then, for the first time,
seen in England, soon destined to become the national weapon of its
stout yeomanry. Their faces closely shorn, and short-cut hair, their
light and succinct garments, were seen by the affrighted peasantry,
who looked upon their landing from a distance, with equal terror and
astonishment. Next came the men-at-arms, sheathed in their glittering
hauberks and bright hose-of-mail, with conical steel helmets on
their heads, long lances in their hands, and huge two-handed swords
transversely girt across their persons. After them landed the pioneers,
the laborers, and carpenters, who made the complement of that
immense army, bearing with them, piece after piece, three fortresses
of timber, arranged beforehand, and prepared to be erected on the
instant, wherever they should come to land. Last of the mighty host,
Duke William left his galley, and the long lines fell into orderly and
beautiful array, as he was rowed to land. In leaping to that wished-for
shore, the Norman’s right foot struck the gunwale of the shallop, and
he fell headlong on the sand, face downward. Instantly, through the
whole array, a deep and shuddering murmur rose--“God guard us--’tis a
sign of evil!”

But ere the sounds had passed away, he had sprung to his feet. “What
is it that you fear?” he shouted, in clear and joyous tones, “or what
dismays you? Lo! I have seized this earth in both mine hands, and, by
the splendor of our God, ’tis yours!”

Loud was the cheer of gratulation which peeled seaward far, and
far into the bosom of the invaded land, at that most brilliant and
successful repartee--and with alacrity and glee--confident of success,
and high in daring courage--the Norman host marched, unopposed, in
regular and terrible array, toward Hastings. Here on the well-known
heights, to this day known by the commemorative name of Battle,
the wooden fortresses were speedily erected; trenches were dug;
and William’s army sat down for the night upon the land, which was
thenceforth to be their heritage--thenceforth for evermore.

The news reached Harold as he lay at York, wounded and resting from his
labors, and on the instant, with his victorious army, he set forth,
publishing, as he marched along, his proclamation to all the chief of
provinces and shires, to arm their followers, and meet him with all
speed at London. The western levies came without delay; those from the
north, owing to distance, were some time behind; and yet, could Harold
have been brought by any means to moderate his fierce and desperate
impatience, he would, ere four days had elapsed, have found himself, at
least, in the command of twice two hundred men. But irritated to the
utmost by the sufferings of his countrymen, whose lands were pitilessly
ravaged, whose tenements were burned for miles around the Norman camp,
whose wives and daughters were subjected to every species of insult and
indignity, the Saxon king pressed onward. And though his forces did
not amount to one-fourth part of the great duke’s array, still, he was
resolved to encounter them, precipitate and furious as a madman.

On the eighteenth day after the defeat of Tosti and Hardrada, the
Saxon army was encamped over against the fortified position of the
invaders. On that same day, a monk, Sir Hugues Maigrot, came to find
Harold, with proposals from the foe, offering him peace on one of three
conditions--either that he should yield the kingdom presently--or leave
it to the arbitration of the pope--or, finally, decide the matter by
appeal to God in single combat.

To each and all of these proposals, the Saxon answered bluntly in the
negative. “I will not yield my kingdom! I will not leave it to the
pope! I will not meet the duke in single combat!”

Again the monk returned. “I come again,” he said, “from William. ‘Tell
Harold,’ said the duke, ‘if he will hold him to his ancient compact,
I yield him all the lands beyond the Humber; I give his brother Gurth
all the demesnes his father, Godwin, held. If he refuse these my last
proffers, tell him before his people, he is a perjured liar, accursed
of the pope, and excommunicated--he, and all those that hold to him!’”

But no effect had the bold words of William on the stern spirits
of the English. “Battle,” they cried--“no peace with the Normans.
Battle--immediate battle!” and with that answer did the priest return
to his employer; and either host prepared for the appeal to that great
arbiter, the sword.

Fairly the morning broke which was to look upon the slaughter of so
many thousands; broad and bright rose the sun before whose setting
one of those two magnificent and gallant armies must necessarily be
involved in utter ruin. As the first rays were visible upon the eastern
sky, Odo, the bishop of Bayeux, William’s maternal brother, performed
high mass before the marshalled troops, wearing his cope and rochet
over his iron harness. The holy rites performed, he leaped upon his
snow-white charger, and, with his truncheon in his hand, arrayed the
cavalry, which he commanded.

It was a glorious spectacle, that mighty host, arrayed in three long
columns of attack, marching with slow and orderly precision against
the palisaded trenches of the Saxons. The men-at-arms of the great
counts of Boulogne and Ponthieu composed the first; the second being
formed by the auxiliar bands of Brittany, Poitou, and Maine; and in the
third, commanded by the duke in person--mounted on a superb Andalusian
charger, wearing about his neck the reliquary on which his rival had
sworn falsely, and accompanied by a young noble, Tunstan the White,
bearing the banner of the pope--were marshalled all the flower and
strength of Normandy. Scattered along the front of the advance were
multitudes of archers, lightly equipped in quilted jerkins, with long
yew bows, and arrows of an ell in length, mingled with crossbow-men
with arbalasts of steel, and square, steel-headed quarrels.

Steadily they advanced, and in good order; while, in their entrenched
camp, guarded by palisades of oak morticed together in a long line of
ponderous trellis-work, the Englishmen awaited their approach, drawn up
around their standard, which--blazoned with the white dragon, long both
the ensign and the war-cry of their race--was planted firmly in the
earth, surrounded by the dense ranks of heavy infantry which formed the
strength of their array.

Just as the charge began, William rode out before the lines, and thus
addressed his soldiery: “Turn your hearts wholly to the combat! set
all upon the die, either to fall or conquer! For if we gain, we shall
be rich and glorious. That which I gain, shall be your gain; that
which I conquer, yours! If I shall win this land, ye shall possess it!
Know, too, and well remember this, that not to claim my right have I
come only, but to revenge--ay, to revenge our gentle nation on all the
felonies, the perjuries, the treasons of the English!--the English,
who, in profound peace, upon Saint Brice’s eve, ruthlessly slew the
unarmed and defenceless Danes; who decimated the bold followers of
Alfred, _my_ kinsman and _your_ countryman, and slew himself by
shameless treachery! On, then, with God’s aid, Normans! on, for revenge
and victory!”

Then out dashed from the lines the boldest of his vavasours, the Norman
Taillefer, singing aloud the famous song--well known through every
province of proud France--the song of Charlemagne and Rollo--tossing
aloft the while his long, two-handed war-sword, and catching it
adroitly as it fell; while at each close of that proud, spirit-stirring
chant, each warrior of that vast array thundered the burden of the
song--“God aid! God aid!”

Then, like a storm of hail, close, deadly, and incessant, went forth
the volleyed showers from arbalast and long-bow; while infantry and
horse charged in unbroken order against the gates and angles of the
fort. But with a cool and stubborn hardihood the Saxon infantry stood
firm. Protected by the massive palisades from the appalling volleys of
the archery, they hurled their short and heavy javelins with certain
aim and deadly execution over their stout defences; while their huge
axes, wherever they came hand to hand, shivered the Norman spears like
reeds, and cleft the heaviest mail, even at a single blow! Long, and
with all the hot, enthusiastic valor of their race, did the assailants
crowd around the ramparts; but it was all in vain--they could not scale
them in the face of that indomitable infantry; they could not force
one timber from its place; and they at length recoiled, weary and
half-subdued, toward the reserve of William.

After a short cessation, again the archery advanced; but, by the
orders of the duke, their volleys were no longer sent point-blank,
but shot at a great elevation, so that they fell in a thick, galling
shower, striking the heads and wounding the unguarded faces of
the bold defenders. Harold himself, who fought on foot beside his
standard, lost his right eye at the first flight; but not for that did
he desert his post, or play less valiantly the part of a determined
soldier and wise leader. Again with that tremendous shout of “Nôtre
Dame--God aid! God aid!” which had, in every realm of Europe, sounded
the harbinger of victory, the horse and foot rushed on to the attack;
while from their rear that heavy and incessant sleet of bolt, and
shaft, and bullet, fell fast and frequent into the dense ranks of
the still-undaunted English. At no point did they force their way,
however, even when fighting at this desperate advantage. At no point
did a single Norman penetrate a gate, or overtop a palisade; while at
one entrance so complete was the repulse of the attacking squadrons,
that they recoiled, hard pressed by the defenders, to a ravine at
some considerable distance from the trenches, deep, dangerous,
and filled with underwood and brambles; these, as they fell back
in confusion, their horses stumbling and unable to recover, were
overthrown and slain pell-mell, and half defeated. One charge of
cavalry, one shock of barbed horse, would have insured the total rout
of the invaders; but--wo for England on that day!--cavalry she had
none, nor barbed horse, to complete gloriously the work her sturdy
footmen had commenced so gallantly. Still, great was the disorder,
great was the disarray and peril, of the foreign soldiery. The cry
went through the host that the great duke was slain; and, though he
flung himself amid the flyers, with his head bare, that they might
recognise his features--threatening, cursing, striking at friend and
foe with undiscriminating violence--it was well nigh an hour before
he could restore the semblance of any discipline or order. This,
once accomplished, he advanced again; and yet a third time, though
he exerted every nerve, was he repulsed at every point in terrible
disorder, and with tremendous loss.

Evening was fast approaching; and well did William know that, if
the following morning should find the Saxons firm in their unforced
entrenchments, his hopes were vain and hopeless! The country, far
and near, was rousing to the Saxon war-cry; and to the Normans, not
to conquer, was to be conquered utterly; and to be conquered was to
perish, one and all! Valor or open force, it was too evident, could
effect nothing against men as valiant and as strong, posted with more
advantage. Guile was his last resource; and guile, as usual, prevailed!

A thousand of his cavaliers advanced, as though about to charge
the trenches at full speed, with lances lowered, and with their
wonted _ensenzie_, “God aid!” But as they neared the palisades, by
preconcerted stratagem, as if they had lost heart, they suddenly drew
bridle, all as a single man, and fled, as it appeared, in irretrievable
disorder, back, back to the main body! Meanwhile, throughout the
lines, the banners were waved to and fro disorderly, and the ranks
shifted, and spears rose and fell, and all betokened their complete
disorganization. The sight was too much even for the cool hardihood
of Saxon courage. With one tremendous shout they rushed from their
entrenchments--which, had they held to them, not forty-fold the force
of William could have successfully assailed--and, wielding with both
hands their bills and axes, plunged headlong in pursuit. That instant,
all was over! For, at a moment’s notice, at a concerted signal of a
single trumpet, the very men they deemed defeated wheeled into line;
and with their spears projecting ten feet, at the least, before their
chargers’ poitrels, their long plumes floating backward in the current
caused by their own quick motion, the chivalry of France bore down
on their pursuers, breathless, confused, and struggling. It was a
massacre, but not a rout; for not a man turned on his heel, or even
thought to fly: but back to back, in desperate groups, they fought
after their ranks were broken, hewing with their short weapons at
the mail-clad lancers, who securely speared them from the backs of
their barbed horses--asking not, nor receiving quarter--true sons of
England to the last, annihilated but not conquered! Night fell, and
Gurth, and Leofwyn, and Harold, lay dead around their standard--pierced
with innumerable wounds, gory, and not to be discerned, so were their
features and their forms defaced and mangled by friend or foeman. Yet
still, when all was lost, without array or order, standards, or chiefs,
or hopes, the Englishmen fought on--till total darkness sank down on
the field of slaughter, and utter inability to slay caused a brief
pause in the unsparing havoc. Such was the vengeance of the Norman!




THE FAITH OF WOMAN.

   “Two things there be on earth that ne’er forget--
    A woman, and a dog--where once their love is set!”--OLD MS.


It was the morning after the exterminating fight at Hastings. The
banner blessed of the Roman pontiff streamed on the tainted air,
from the same hillock whence the dragon standard of the Saxons had
shone unconquered to the sun of yester-even! Hard by was pitched the
proud pavilion of the conqueror, who, after the tremendous strife and
perilous labors of the preceding day, reposed himself in fearless
and untroubled confidence upon the field of his renown; secure in
the possession of the land, which he was destined to transmit to his
posterity for many a hundred years, by the red title of the sword.

To the defeated Saxons, morning, however, brought but a renewal of
those miseries which, having yesterday commenced with the first victory
of their Norman lords, were never to conclude, or even to relax, until
the complete amalgamation of the rival races should leave no Normans to
torment, no Saxons to endure; all being merged at last into one general
name of English, and by their union giving origin to the most powerful,
and brave, and intellectual people, the world has ever looked upon
since the extinction of Rome’s freedom.

At the time of which we are now speaking, nothing was thought of by the
victors save how to rivet most securely on the necks of the unhappy
natives their yoke of iron; nothing by the poor, subjugated Saxons, but
how to escape for the moment the unrelenting massacre which was urged
far and wide by the remorseless conquerors throughout the devastated
country. With the defeat of Harold’s host, all national hope of freedom
was at once lost to England. Though, to a man, the English population
were brave and loyal, and devoted to their country’s rights, the
want of leaders--all having perished side by side on that disastrous
field--of combination, without which myriads are but dust in the scale
against the force of one united handful--rendered them quite unworthy
of any serious fears, and even of consideration, to the bloodthirsty
barons of the invading army. Over the whole expanse of level country
which might be seen from the slight elevation whereon was pitched the
camp of William, on every side might be descried small parties of the
Norman horse, driving in with their bloody lances, as if they were mere
cattle, the unhappy captives; a few of whom they now began to spare,
not from the slightest sentiment of mercy, but literally that their
arms were weary with the task of slaying, although their hearts were
yet insatiate of blood.

It must be taken now into consideration by those who listen with
dismay and wonder to the accounts of pitiless barbarity--of ruthless,
indiscriminating slaughter on the part of men whom they have hitherto
been taught to look upon as brave indeed as lions in the field, but
not partaking of the lion’s nature after the field was won--not only
that the seeds of enmity had long been sown between those rival people,
but that the deadly crop of hatred had grown up, watered abundantly by
the tears and blood of either; and, lastly, that the fierce fanaticism
of religious persecution was added to the natural rancor of a war
waged for the ends of conquest or extermination. The Saxon nation,
from the king downward to the meanest serf who fought beneath his
banner, or buckled on the arms of liberty, were all involved under the
common ban of the pope’s interdict. They were accursed of God, and
handed over by his holy church to the kind mercies of the secular arm;
and therefore, though but yesterday they were a powerful and united
nation, to-day they were but a vile horde of scattered outlaws, whom
any man might slay wherever he should find them, whether in arms or
otherwise--amenable for blood neither to any mortal jurisdiction, nor
even to the ultimate tribunal to which all must submit hereafter,
unless deprived of their appeal like these poor fugitives, by
excommunication from the pale of Christianity. For thirty miles around
the Norman camp, pillars of smoke by day, continually streaming upward
to the polluted heaven, and the red glare of nightly conflagration,
told fatally the doom of many a happy home! Neither the castle nor the
cottage might preserve their male inhabitants from the sword’s edge,
their females from more barbarous persecution. Neither the sacred
hearth of hospitality nor the more sacred altars of God’s churches
might protect the miserable fugitives; neither the mail-shirt of the
man-at-arms nor the monk’s frock of serge availed against the thrust
of the fierce Norman spear. All was dismay and havoc, such as the land
wherein those horrors were enacted has never witnessed since, through
many a following age.

High noon approached, and in the conqueror’s tent a gorgeous feast
was spread. The red wine flowed profusely, and song and minstrelsy
arose with their heart-soothing tones, to which the feeble groans of
dying wretches bore a dread burden from the plain whereon they still
lay struggling in their great agonies, too sorely maimed to live, too
strong as yet to die. But, ever and anon, their wail waxed feebler
and less frequent; for many a plunderer was on foot, licensed to ply
his odious calling in the full light of day--reaping his first if not
his richest booty from the dead bodies of their slaughtered foemen.
Ill fared the wretches who lay there, untended by the hand of love
or mercy, “scorched by the death-thirst, and writhing in vain;” but
worse fared they who showed a sign of life to the relentless robbers of
the dead, for then the dagger--falsely called that of mercy--was the
dispenser of immediate immortality. The conqueror sat at his triumphant
board, and barons drank his health: “First English monarch, of the pure
blood of Normandy!”--“King by the right of the sword’s edge!”--“Great,
glorious, and sublime!” Yet was not his heart softened, nor was his
bitter hate toward the unhappy prince who had so often ridden by
his side in war, and feasted at the same board with him in peace,
relinquished or abated. Even while the feast was at the highest, while
every heart was jocund and sublime, a trembling messenger approached,
craving on bended knee permission to address the conqueror and
king--for so he was already schooled by brief but hard experience to
style the devastator of his country.

“Speak out, Dog Saxon!” cried the ferocious prince; “but since thou
must speak, see that thy speech be brief, an’ thou wouldst keep thy
tongue uncropped thereafter!”

“Great duke and mighty,” replied the trembling envoy, “I bear you
greeting from Elgitha, herewhile the noble wife of Godwin, the queenly
mother of our late monarch--now, as she bade me style her, the humblest
of your suppliants and slaves. Of your great nobleness and mercy,
mighty king, she sues you, that you will grant her the poor leave to
search amid the heaps of those our Saxon dead, that her three sons may
at least lie in consecrated earth--so may God send you peace and glory
here, and everlasting happiness hereafter!”

“Hear to the Saxon slave!” William exclaimed, turning as if in wonder
toward his nobles; “hear to the Saxon slave, that dares to speak of
consecrated earth, and of interment for the accursed body of that most
perjured, excommunicated liar! Hence! tell the mother of the dead dog,
whom you have dared to style your king, that for the interdicted and
accursed dead the sands of the seashore are but too good a sepulchre!”

“She bade me proffer humbly to your acceptance the weight of Harold’s
body in pure gold,” faintly gasped forth the terrified and cringing
messenger, “so you would grant her that permission.”

“Proffer us gold! what gold, or whose? Know, villain, all the gold
throughout this conquered realm _is_ ours. Hence, dog and outcast,
hence! nor presume e’er again to come, insulting us by proffering, as
a boon to our acceptance, that which we _own_ already, by the most
indefeasible and ancient right of conquest!--Said I not well, knights,
vavasours, and nobles?”

“Well! well and nobly!” answered they, one and all. “The land is ours,
and all that therein is: their dwellings, their demesnes, their wealth,
whether of gold, or silver, or of cattle--yea, they themselves are
ours! themselves, their sons, their daughters, and their wives--our
portion and inheritance, to be our slaves for ever!”

“Begone! you have our answer,” exclaimed the duke, spurning him with
his foot; “and hark ye, arbalast-men and archers, if any Saxon more
approach us on like errand, see if his coat of skin be proof against
the quarrel of the shaft!”

And once again the feast went on; and louder rang the revelry, and
faster flew the wine-cup, round the tumultuous board. All day the
banquet lasted, even till the dews of heaven fell on that fatal field,
watered sufficiently already by the rich gore of many a noble heart.
All day the banquet lasted, and far was it prolonged into the watches
of the night; when, rising with the wine-cup in his hand--“Nobles and
barons,” cried the duke, “friends, comrades, conquerors, bear witness
to my vow! Here, on these heights of Hastings, and more especially upon
yon mound and hillock, where God gave to us our high victory, and
where our last foe fell--there will I raise an abbey to his eternal
praise and glory. Richly endowed, it shall be, from the first fruits of
this our land. BATTLE, it shall be called, to send the memory of this,
the great and singular achievement of our race, to far posterity; and,
by the splendor of our God, wine shall be plentier among the monks of
Battle, than water in the noblest and richest cloister else, search the
world over! This do I swear: so may God aid, who hath thus far assisted
us for _our_ renown, and will not now deny his help, when it be asked
for _his own_ glory!”

The second day dawned on the place of horror, and not a Saxon had
presumed, since the intolerant message of the duke, to come to look
upon his dead. But now the ground was needed whereon to lay the first
stone of the abbey William had vowed to God. The ground was needed;
and, moreover, the foul steam from the human shambles was pestilential
on the winds of heaven. And now, by trumpet-sound, and proclamation
through the land, the Saxons were called forth, on pain of death, to
come and seek their dead, lest the health of the conquerors should
suffer from the pollution they themselves had wrought. Scarce had the
blast sounded, and the glad tidings been announced once only, ere from
their miserable shelters, where they had herded with the wild beasts of
the forest--from wood, morass, and cavern, happy if there they might
escape the Norman spear--forth crept the relics of that persecuted
race. Old men and matrons, with hoary heads, and steps that tottered
no less from the effect of terror than of age--maidens, and youths,
and infants--too happy to obtain permission to search amid those
festering heaps, dabbling their hands in the corrupt and pestilential
gore which filled each nook and hollow of the dinted soil, so they
might bear away, and water with their tears, and yield to consecrated
ground, the relics of those brave ones, once loved so fondly, and now
so bitterly lamented. It was toward the afternoon of that same day,
when a long train was seen approaching, with crucifix, and cross,
and censer--the monks of Waltham abbey, coming to offer homage for
themselves, and for their tenantry and vassals, to him whom they
acknowledged as their king; expressing their submission to the high
will of the Norman pontiff--justified, as they said, and proved by the
assertion of God’s judgment upon the hill of Hastings. Highly delighted
by this absolute submission, the first he had received from any English
tongue, the conqueror received the monks with courtesy and favor,
granting them high immunities, and promising them free protection, and
the unquestioned tenor of their broad demesnes for ever. Nay, after he
had answered their address, he detained two of their number--men of
intelligence, as with his wonted quickness of perception he instantly
discovered--from whom to derive information as to the nature of his
newly-acquired country and newly-conquered subjects. Osgad and Ailric,
the deputed messengers from the respected principal of their community,
had yet a further and higher object than to tender their submission
to the conqueror. Their orders were, at all and every risk, to gain
permission to consign the corpse of their late king and founder to the
earth previously denied to him. And soon, emboldened by the courtesy
and kindness of the much-dreaded Norman, they took courage to approach
the subject, knowing it interdicted, even on pain of death; and, to
their wonder and delight, it was unhesitatingly granted.

Throughout the whole of the third day succeeding that unparalleled
defeat and slaughter, those old men might be seen toiling among the
naked carcasses, disfigured, maimed, and festering in the sun, toiling
to find the object of their devoted veneration. But vain were all their
labors--vain was their search, even when they called in the aid of his
most intimate attendants, ay, of the mother that had borne him! The
corpses of his brethren, Leofwyn and Gurth, were soon discovered; but
not one eye, even of those who had most dearly loved him, could now
distinguish the maimed features of the king.

At last, when hope itself was now almost extinct, some one named
Edith--Edith the Swan-necked! She had been the mistress--years ere he
had been, or dreamed of being, king--to the brave son of Godwin. She
had beloved him in her youth with that one, single-minded, constant,
never-ending love, which but few, even of her devoted sex, can
feel, and they but once, and for one cherished object. Deserted and
dishonored when he she loved was elevated to the throne, she had not
ceased from her true adoration; but, quitting her now-joyless home, had
shared her heart between her memories and her God, in the sequestered
cloisters of the nunnery of Croyland. More days elapsed ere she could
reach the fatal spot, and the increased corruption denied the smallest
hope of his discovery: yet, from the moment when the mission was named
to her, she expressed her full and confident conviction that she could
recognise that loved one so long as but one hair remained on that head
she had once so cherished! It was night when she arrived on the fatal
field, and by the light of torches once more they set out on their
awful duty. “Show me the spot,” she said, “where the last warrior
fell;” and she was led to the place where had been found the corpses of
his gallant brethren: and, with an instinct that nothing could deceive,
she went straight to the corpse of Harold! It had been turned already
to and fro many times by those who sought it; his mother had looked on
it, and pronounced it not her son’s: but that devoted heart knew it at
once--and broke! Whom rank, and wealth, and honors had divided, defeat
and death made one!--and the same grave contained the cold remains of
Edith the Swan-necked and the last scion of the Saxon kings of England.




THE ERRING ARROW.

   “’Tis merry, ’tis merry, in good green-wood,
      When the navis and merle are singing,
    When the deer sweeps by, and the hounds are in cry,
      And the hunter’s horn is ringing.”--LADY OF THE LAKE.


As beautiful a summer’s morning as ever chased the stars from heaven,
was dawning over that wide tract of waste and woodland, which still,
though many a century has now mossed over the ancestral oaks which then
were in their lusty prime, retains the name by which it was at that
day styled appropriately--the “New Forest.” Few years had then elapsed
since the first Norman lord of England had quenched the fires that
burned in thirty hamlets; had desecrated God’s own altars, making the
roofless aisles of many a parish church the haunt of the grim wolf or
antlered red-deer; turning fair fields and cultured vales to barren and
desolate wastes--to gratify his furious passion for that sport which
has so justly been entitled the mimicry of warfare. Few years had then
elapsed, yet not a symptom of their old fertility could now be traced
in the wild plains waving with fern, and overrun with copsewood, broom,
and brambles; unless it might be found in the profuse luxuriance with
which this thriftless crop had overspread the champaign once smiling
like a goodly garden with every meet production for the sustenance of
man.

It was, as has been said, as beautiful a summer’s morning as ever eye
of man beheld. The sun, which had just raised the verge of his great
orb above the low horizon, was checkering the mossy greensward with
long, fantastic lines of light and shadow, and tinging the gnarled
limbs of the huge oaks with ruddy gold; the dew, which lay abundantly
on every blade of grass and every bending wild-flower, had not yet felt
his power, nor raised a single mist-wreath to veil the brightness of
the firmament; nor was the landscape, that lay there steeped in the
lustre of the glowing skies, less lovely than the dawn that waked above
it: long sylvan avenues sweeping for miles through every variation
of the wildest forest-scenery--here traversing in easy curves wide
undulations clothed with the purple heather; here sinking downward to
the brink of sheets of limpid water; now running straight through lines
of mighty trees, and now completely overbowered as they dived through
brakes and dingles, where the birch and holly grew so thickly mingled
with the prickly furze and creeping eglantine as to make twilight of
the hottest noontide. Such were the leading features of the country
which had most deeply felt, and has borne down to later days most
evident memorials of, the Norman’s tyranny.

Deeply embosomed in these delicious solitudes--surrounded by its
flanking walls, and moat brimmed from a neighboring streamlet, with
barbican and ballium, and all the elaborate defences that marked the
architecture of the conquering race--stood Malwood keep, the favorite
residence of Rufus, no less than it had been of his more famous sire.
Here, early as was the hour, all was already full of life, full of the
joyous and inspiriting confusion that still characterizes, though in
a less degree than in those days of feudal pomp, the preparations for
the chase. Tall yeomen hurried to and fro--some leading powerful and
blooded chargers, which reared, and pawed the earth, and neighed till
every turret echoed to the din; some struggling to restrain the mighty
bloodhounds which bayed and strove indignantly against the leash; while
others, lying in scattered groups upon the esplanade of level turf,
furbished their cloth-yard shafts, or strung the six-foot bows, which,
for the first time, had drawn blood in England upon the fatal field of
Hastings.

It might be seen, upon the instant, it was no private retinue that
mustered to the “mystery of forests,” as in the quaint phrase of the
day the noble sport was designated. A hundred horses, at the least,
of the most costly and admired breeds, were there paraded: the huge,
coal-black _destrier_ of Flanders, limbed like an elephant, but with
a coat that might have shamed the richest velvet by its sleekness;
the light and graceful Andalusian, with here and there a Spaniard,
springy, and fleet, and fearless--while dogs, in numbers infinitely
greater, and of races yet more various, made up the moving picture:
bloodhounds to track the wounded quarry by their unerring scent;
slowhounds to force him from his lair; gazehounds and lymmers to
outstrip him on the level plain; mastiffs to bay the boar, “crook-kneed
and dew-lapped like Thessalian bulls;” with terriers to unkennel beasts
of earth, and spaniels to rouse the fowls of air. Nor were these all,
for birds themselves were there, trained to make war on their own
race: the long-winged hawks of Norway, with lanners from the isle of
Man; merlins, and jerfalcons, and gosshawks. No tongue could tell the
beauty of the creatures thus assembled: some scarcely half-reclaimed,
and showing their wild nature at every glance of their quick, flashing
eyes; some docile and affectionate, and in all things dependent upon
man, to whom, despite caprice, and cruelty, and coldness, they are
more faithful in his need than he, proud though he be, dare boast
himself toward his fellow. No fancy could imagine the superb and lavish
gorgeousness of their equipment.

A long, keen bugle-blast rang from the keep, and in an instant a
hundred bows were strung, a hundred ready feet were in the stirrup.
Again if rang, longer and keener than before, and every forester was in
his saddle; while from the low-browed arch, bending their stately heads
quite to their saddle-bows, over the echoing drawbridge a dozen knights
rode forth, the followers and comrades of their king.

Scarcely above the middle size, but moulded in most exquisite
proportion, thin-flanked, deep-chested, muscular, and lithe, and agile,
there was not one of all his train, noble, or squire, or yeoman, who
could display a form so fitted for the union of activity with strength,
of beauty with endurance, as could the second William. His hair, from
which he had derived his famous soubriquet, was not of that marked and
uncomely hue which we should now term red, but rather of a bright and
yellowish brown, curled closely to a classical and bust-like head;
his eye was quick and piercing; his features, severally, were well
formed and handsome; yet had the eye a wavering, and restless, and at
times even downcast expression; and the whole aspect of the face told
many a tale of pride, and jealousy, and passion--suspicion that might
be roused to cruelty, and wilfulness that surely would be lashed by
any opposition to violent and reckless fury. But now the furrows on
the brow were all relaxed, the harsh lines of the mouth smoothed into
temporary blandness. “Forward, messires!” he cried, in Norman-French;
“the morning finds us sluggards. What, ho! Sir Walter Tyrrel, shall we
two company to-day, and gage our luck against these gay gallants?”

“Right jovially, my liege,” returned the knight whom he addressed. A
tall, dark-featured soldier rode beside his bridle-rein, bearing a
bow which not an archer in the train could bend. “Right jovially will
we--an’ they dare cope with us! What sayest thou, De Beauchamp--darest
thou wager thy black boar-hound against a cast of merlins--thyself and
Vermandois against his grace and me?”

“Nay, thou shouldst gage him odds, my Walter,” Rufus interposed; “thy
shaft flies ever truest, nor yield I to any bow save thine!”

“To his, my liege?” cried Beauchamp, “thou yield to his! Never drew
Walter Tyrrel so true a string as thou; he lacks the sleight, I trow,
so ekes it out with strength! Tyrrel must hold him pleased if he rate
second i’ the field.”

“How now, Sir Walter?” shouted the king; “hearest thou this bold De
Beauchamp, and wilt thou yield the bucklers?--not thou, I warrant me,
though it be to thy king!”

“So please your highness,” Tyrrel answered; “’tis but a sleight to
’scape our wager--’scaping the shame beside of yielding! He deems us
over-strong for him, and so would part us!”

“Nay, by my halydom,” Rufus replied with a gay smile, “but we will have
it so. We two will ride in company, each shooting his own shaft for his
own hand. I dare uphold my arrow for twenty marks of gold, and my white
Alan, against thy Barbary bay. Darest thou, Sir Walter?”

“I know not _that_--I dare not!” answered Tyrrel; “but your grace
wagers high, nor will I lightly lose Bay Barbary: if so our wager
stand, I shoot no roving shaft.”

“Shoot as thou wilt, so stands it!”

“Amen!” cried Tyrrel, “and I doubt not to hear your grace confess
Tyrrel hath struck the lordlier quarry.”

“Away, then, all! away!” and, setting spurs to his curveting horse,
the monarch led the way at a hard gallop, followed by all his train--a
long and bright procession, their gay plumes and many-colored garments
offering a lively contrast to the deep, leafy verdure of July, and
their clear weapons glancing lifelike to the sunshine.

They had careered along, with merriment and music, perhaps three miles
into the forest, when the deep baying of a hound was heard, at some
short distance to the right, from a thick verge of coppice. Instantly
the king curbed in his fiery horse, and raised his hand on high, waving
a silent halt. “Ha! have we outlaws here?” he whispered close in the
ear of Tyrrel. “’Fore God, but they shall rue it!”

Scarcely had he spoken, when a buck burst from a thicket, and, ere it
made three bounds, leaped high into the air and fell, its heart pierced
through and through by the unerring shaft of an outlying ranger, who
the next instant stepped out of his covert, and, catching sight of
the gay cavalcade confronting him--the sounds of whose approach he
must have overlooked entirely in the excitement of his sport--turned
hastily as if to fly. But it was all too late: a dozen of the king’s
retainers had dashed their rowels into their horses’ flanks the instant
he appeared, and scarcely had he discovered their advance before he was
their prisoner.

“A Saxon, by my soul,” cried Rufus, with a savage scowl, “taken
red-hand, and in the fact! Out with thy wood-knife, Damian! By the most
holy Virgin, we will first mar his archery, and then present him with
such a taste of venison as shall, I warrant me, appease his hankering
for one while. Off with his thumb and finger! off with them speedily, I
say, an’ thou wouldst ’scape his doom! Ha! grinnest thou, villain?” he
continued, as a contortion writhed the bold visage of his victim, who,
certain of his fate, and hopeless of resistance or of rescue, yielded
with stubborn resolution to his torturers--“an’ this doth make thee
smile, thou shalt laugh outright shortly! Hence with him, now, Damian
and Hugonet; and thou, Raoul, away with thee--set toils enow, uncouple
half a score of brachs and slowhounds, and see thou take me a right
stag of ten ere vespers!--Barebacked shalt thou ride on him to the
forest, thou unhanged Saxon thief, and see how his horned kinsmen will
entreat thee! See that the dog escape ye not, or ye shall swing for it.
Bind him, and drag him hence to the old church of Lyme; hold him there,
on your lives, till sunset! And ye--lead thither his wild charger: we
will sup there upon the greensward, as we return to Malwood, and thou
shalt make us merry with thy untutored horsemanship. Now for our wager,
Walter! Forward--hurrah!” and on again they dashed, until they reached
the choicest hunting-ground of all that spacious woodland--the desolate
and desert spot where once had stood the fairest village of the land.

Unroofed and doorless, in different stages of decay, a score or two of
cottages, once hospitable, happy homes of a free peasantry, stood here
and there amid the brushwood which had encroached upon the precincts;
while in the midst the desecrated church of Lyme reared its gray
tower, now overgrown with ivy, and crumbling in silent ruin. Upon the
cross which crowned the lowly tower, there sat, as they approached, a
solitary raven--nor, though the whoop and horn rang close below his
perch, did he show any sign of wildness or of fear; but, rising slowly
on his wing, flapped round and round in two or three slow circles, and
then with a hoarse croak resumed his station. The raven was a favorite
bird with the old hunters; and when the deer was slain he had his
portion, thence named “the raven’s bone.” Indeed, so usual was the
practice, that this bird, the wildest by its nature of all the things
that fly, would rarely shun a company which its sagacity descried to be
pursuers of the sylvan game.

“What! sittest thou there, old black-frock, in our presence?” shouted
the king, bending his bow; “but we will teach thee manners!” Still,
the bird moved not, but again sent forth his ominous and sullen croak
above the jocund throng. The bow was raised--the cord was drawn back
to the monarch’s ear: it twanged, and the next moment the hermit-bird
came fluttering down, transfixed by the long shaft, with painful and
discordant cries, and fell close at the feet of Rufus’s charger.

There was a murmur in the crowd; and one, a page who waited on the
king, whispered with a pale face and agitated voice into his fellow’s
ear: “I have heard say--

    ‘Whose shaft ’gainst raven’s life is set,
    Shaft’s feather his heart-blood shall wet!’”

The red king caught the whisper, and turning with an inflamed
countenance and flashing eye on the unwitting wakener of his
wrath--“Dastard and fool!” he shouted; and, clinching his gloved
hand, he dealt the boy so fierce a blow upon the chest, that he fell
to the earth like a lifeless body, plunging so heavily upon the sod
head-foremost, that the blood gushed from nose, ears, mouth, and he lay
senseless and inanimate as the surrounding clay. With a low, sneering
laugh, the tyrant once more spurred his charger forward, amid the
smothered execrations of his Norman followers, boiling with indignation
for that one of their noble and victorious race should have endured the
foul wrong of a blow, though it were dealt him by a monarch’s hand. And
there were scowling brows, and teeth set hard, among the very noblest
of his train; and, as the glittering band swept on, the father of the
injured boy--a dark-browed, aged veteran, who had couched lance at
Hastings to win the throne of earth’s most lovely island for that base
tyrant’s sire--reined in his horse, and, leaping to the earth, upraised
the body from the gory turf, and wiped away the crimson stream from
the pale features, and dashed pure water, brought from a neighboring
brooklet in a comrade’s bacinet, upon the fair young brow--but it
was all in vain! The dying child rolled upward his faint eyes; they
rested on the anxious lineaments of that war-beaten sire, who, stern
and fiery to all else, had ever to that motherless boy been soft and
tender as a woman. “Father,” he gasped, while a brief, painful smile
illuminated with a transient gleam his ashy lips--“mercy, kind mother
Mary! Father--father”--the words died in the utterance; the dim eyes
wavered--closed; the head fell back upon the stalwart arm that had
supported it, and, with one long and quivering convulsion, the innocent
soul departed!

Some three or four--inferior barons of the train, yet each a gentleman
of lineage and prowess in the field, each one in his own estimate a
prince’s peer--had paused around the desolate father and his murdered
child; and now, as the old man gazed hopelessly upon the features of
his first-born and his only, the sympathy which had moistened their
hard eyes and relaxed their iron features was swallowed up in a fierce
glare of indignation, irradiating their scarred and war-seamed visages
with that sublime expression, from which, when glowing on the face of a
resolute and fearless man, the wildest savage of the forest will shrink
in mute dismay. The father, after a long and fearful struggle with his
more tender feelings--wringing his hard hands till the blood-drops
started redly from beneath every nail--lifted his face, more pale and
ashy in its hues than that of the inanimate form which he had loved so
tenderly; and as he lifted it he caught the fierce glow mantling on the
front of each well-tried companion, and his own features lightened with
the self-same blaze: his hand sank downward to the hilt of the long
poniard at his girdle, and the fingers worked with a convulsive tremor
as they griped the well-known pommel, and an exulting smile curled his
mustached lip, prophetic of revenge. Once more he bowed above the dead;
he laid his broad hand on the pulseless heart, and printed a long kiss
on the forehead; then lifting, with as much tenderness as though they
still had sense and feeling, the relics of the only thing he loved on
earth, he bore them from the roadside into the shelter of a tangled
coppice; unbuckled his long military mantle, and spreading it above
them, secured it at each corner by heavy stones, a temporary shelter
from insult or intrusion. This done, in total silence he rejoined his
friends, who had foreborne to offer aid where they perceived it would
be held superfluous. Without one word, he grasped the bridle of his
charger, tightened his girths, and then, setting no foot to stirrup,
vaulted almost without an effort into the steel-bound demipique.
Raising his arm aloft, he pointed into the long aisles of the forest,
wherein the followers of Rufus had long since disappeared.

“Our thoughts are one!” he hissed, in accents scarcely articulate,
between his grinded teeth; “what need of words? Are not we soldiers,
gentlemen, and Normans, and shall not deeds speak for us?”

_Truly_ he said, their thoughts were one!--for each had severally
steeled his heart as by a common impulse: and now, without a word, or
sign, or any interchange of sentiments, feeling that each understood
the other, they wheeled their horses on the tyrant’s track, and at a
hard trot rode away, resolved on instant vengeance.

Meanwhile, the hunters had arrived at their appointed ground. The
slowhounds were uncoupled and cast loose; varlets with hunting-poles,
and mounted grooms, pressed through the underwood; while, in each open
glade and riding of the forest, yeomen were stationed with relays of
tall and stately gazehounds, to slip upon the hart the instant he
should break from the thick covert. The knights and nobles galloped
off, each with his long-bow strung, and cloth-yard arrow notched and
ready, to posts assigned to them--some singly, some in pairs; all was
replete with animation and with fiery joy.

According to the monarch’s pleasure, Tyrrel rode at his bridle-hand,
for that day’s space admitted as his comrade and his rival. Two
splendid bloodhounds, coal-black, but tawny on the muzzle and the
breast, so accurately trained that they required no leash to check
their ardor, ran at the red king’s heel; but neither page nor squire,
such was his special mandate, accompanied their master. And now the
loud shouts of the foresters and the deep baying of the pack gave note
that the chase was on foot; and by the varied cadences and different
points whence pealed the soul-exciting clamors, Rufus, a skilful and
sagacious sportsman, immediately perceived that two if not three of
the noble animals they hunted must have been roused at once. For a few
seconds he stood upright in his stirrups, his hand raised to his ear,
lest the slight summer breeze should interrupt the welcome sounds.

“This way,” he said, in low and guarded tones, “this way they bend;
and with the choicest buck--hark to old Hubert’s holloa! and _there,
there_, Tyrrel, list to that burst--list to that long, sharp yell!
Beshrew my soul, if that be not stanch Palamon--that hound is worth
ten thousand. Ha! they are now at fault. Again! brave Palamon again!
and now they turn; hark how the echoes roar! Ay, they are crossing now
the Deer-leap dingle; and now, now, as their notes ring out distinct
and tuneful, they gain the open moorland. Spur, Tyrrel, for your life!
spur, spur! we see him not again till we reach Bolderwood”--and, with
the word, he raised his bugle to his lips, and wound it lustily and
well till every oak replied to the long flourish.

Away they flew, driving their foaming chargers, now through the tangled
underwood with tightened reins, now with free heads careering along
the level glades, now sweeping over the wide brooks that intersect
the forest as though their steeds were winged, and now, at distant
intervals, pausing to catch the fitful music of the pack. After a
furious chase of at least two hours, the sounds still swelling on their
right, nearer and nearer as they rode the farther, the avenue through
which they had been galloping for many minutes was intersected at
right angles by one yet wider though neglected, and, as it would seem,
disused, for many marshy pools might be seen glittering to the sun,
which was now fast descending to the westward, and many plants of ash
and tufted hazels had sprung up, marring the smoothness of its surface.
Here, by a simultaneous motion, and as it seemed obedient to a common
thought, both riders halted.

“He must cross, Tyrrel, he _must_ cross here,” cried the excited
monarch; “ay, by the life of Him who made us--and that before we
be ten minutes older. I will take stand even here, where I command
both alleys: ride thou some fifty yards or so, to the right; stand
by yon rowan sapling. And mark me--see’st thou yon scathed but giant
oak?--Now, if he pass on this side, mine is the first shot; if on the
other, thine. I will not balk thy fortunes; meddle not thou with mine!”

They parted--the king sitting like a statue on his well-trained but
fiery Andalusian, the rein thrown loosely on the horse’s neck, and the
bow already half bent in the vigorous right hand; the baron riding, as
he had been commanded, down the neglected avenue, till he had reached
the designated tree, when he wheeled round his courser and remained
likewise motionless, facing the king, at that brief interval.

Nearer and nearer came the baying of the pack, while ever and anon a
sharp and savage treble, mixed with the deeper notes, gave token to the
skilful foresters that they were running with the game in view. Nearer
it came, and nearer; and now it was so close, that not an echo could
be traced amid the stormy music: but with the crash no human shout
was blended, no bugle lent its thrilling voice to the blithe uproar,
no clang of hoofs announced the presence of pursuers. All, even the
best and boldest riders, saving those two who waited there in calm,
deliberate impatience, had long been foiled by the quick turns and
undiminished pace maintained by the stout quarry.

The crashing of the branches might now be heard distinctly, as they
were separated by some body in swift motion; and next the laboring
sobs of a beast overdone with toil and anguish; the waving of the
coppice followed in a long, sinuous line, resembling in some degree
the wake of a fleet ship among the rolling billows. Midway it furrowed
the dense thicket between the king and Tyrrel, but with an inclination
toward the former. His quick eye noted his advantage: his bow rose
slowly and with a steady motion to its level; it was drawn to its
full extent--the forked steel head pressing against the polished yew,
the silken string stretched home to the right ear. The brambles were
forced violently outward, and with a mighty but laborious effort the
hunted stag dashed into the more open space. Scarcely had he cleared
the thicket, before a sharp and ringing twang announced the shot of
Rufus. So true had been his aim, that the barbed arrow grazed the
withers of the game--a hart of grease, with ten tines on his noble
antlers--leaving a gory line where it had razed the skin; and so strong
was the arm that launched it, that the shaft, glancing downward, owing
to the king’s elevation and the short distance of the mark at which he
aimed, was buried nearly to the feathers in the soft, mossy greensward.
The wounded stag bounded at least six feet into the air; and Tyrrel,
deeming the work already done, lowered his weapon. But the king’s
sight was truer. Raising his bridle-hand to screen his eyes from the
rays, now nearly level, of the setting sun--“Ho!” he cried, “Tyrrel,
shoot--in the fiend’s name shoot!”

Before the words had reached his ear, the baron saw his error;
for, instantly recovering, the gallant deer dashed onward, passing
immediately beneath the oak-tree which Rufus had already mentioned.
Raising his bow with a rapidity which seemed incredible, Tyrrel
discharged his arrow. It struck, just at the correct elevation, against
the gnarled trunk of the giant tree; but, swift as was its flight, the
motion of the wounded deer was yet more rapid: he had already crossed
the open glade, and was lost in the thicket opposite. Diverted from
its course, but unabated in its force, the Norman shaft sped onward;
full, full and fairly it plunged into the left side of the hapless
monarch, unguarded by the arm which he had cast aloft. The keen point
actually drove clear through his body, and through his stout buff coat,
coming out over his right hip; while the goose-feather, which had
winged it to its royal mark, was literally dabbled in his life-blood!

Without a breath, a groan, a struggle, the Conqueror’s son dropped
lifeless from his saddle. His horse, freed from the pressure of the
master-limbs that had so well controlled him, reared upright as the
monarch fell, and, with a wild, quick snort of terror, rushed furiously
away into the forest. The bloodhounds had already, by the fierce
cunning of their race, discovered that their game was wounded, and had
joined freshly with his old pursuers; while he, who did the deed, gazed
for one moment horror-stricken on the work of his right hand, and then,
without so much as drawing nigh to see if anything of life remained to
his late master, casting his fatal bow into the bushes, put spurs to
his unwearied horse, and drew not bridle till he reached the coast;
whence, taking ship, he crossed the seas, and fell in Holy Land, hoping
by many deeds of wilful bloodshed--such is the inconsistency of man--to
win God’s pardon for one involuntary slaughter.

Hours rolled away. The sun had set already, and his last gleams were
rapidly departing from the skies, nor had the moon yet risen, when six
horsemen came slowly, searching as it were for traces on the earth, up
the same alley along which Tyrrel and the king had ridden with such
furious speed since noontide. The lingering twilight did not suffice to
show the features of the group, but the deep tones of the second rider
were those of the bereaved and vengeful father.

“How now?” he said, addressing his words to the man who led the way,
mounted upon a shaggy forest-pony; “how now, Sir Saxon!--is it for this
we saved thee from the tyrant’s hangmen, that thou shouldst prove a
blind guide in this matter?”

“Norman,” replied the other, still scanning, as he spoke, the ground
dinted and torn by the fresh hoof-tracks, “my heart thirsts for
vengeance not less than thine; nor is our English blood less stanch,
although it be less fiery, than the hottest stream that swells the
veins of your proud race! I tell you, Rufus hath passed here, and he
hath not turned back. You _shall_ have your revenge!”

Even as he spoke, the beast which he bestrode set his feet firm and
snuffed the air, staring as though his eyeballs would start from their
sockets, and uttering a tremulous, low neigh. “Blood hath been shed
here! and that, I trow, since sunset! Jesu! what have we now?” he
cried, as his eye fell upon the carcass that so lately had exulted in
the possession of health, and energy, and strength, and high dominion.
“By Thor the Thunderer, it is the tyrant’s corpse!”

“And slain,” replied the father, “slain by another’s hand than mine!
Curses, ten thousand curses, on him who shot this shaft!” While he was
speaking he dismounted, approached the body of his destined victim, and
gazed with an eye of hatred most insatiably savage upon the rigid face
and stiffening limbs; then drawing his broad dagger--“I have sworn!”
he muttered, as he besmeared its blade with the dark, curdled gore--“I
have sworn! Lie there and _rot_,” he added, spurning the body with his
foot. “And now we must away, for we are known and noted; and, whoso
did the deed, ’tis we shall bear the blame of it. We must see other
lands. I will but leave a brief word with the monks of Lymington, that
they commit my poor boy to a hallowed tomb, and then farewell, fair
England!” And they, too, rode away, nor were they ever seen again on
British soil; nor--though shrewd search was made for them until the
confessor of Tyrrel, when that bold spirit had departed, revealed the
real slayer of the king--did any rumor of their residence or fortunes
reach any mortal ear.

The moon rose over the New Forest broad and unclouded, and the dew
fell heavy over glade and woodland. The night wore onward, and the
bright planet set, and one by one the stars went out--and still the
king lay there untended and alone. The morning mists were rising,
when the rumbling sound of a rude cart awoke the echoes of that
fearful solitude. A charcoal-burner of the forest was returning
from his nocturnal labors, whistling cheerfully the burden of some
Saxon ballad, as he threaded the dark mazes of the green-wood. A
wiry-looking cur--maimed, in obedience to the forest-law, lest he
should chase the deer reserved to the proud conquerors alone--followed
the footsteps of his master, who had already passed the corpse, when
a half-startled yelp, followed upon the instant by a most melancholy
howl, attracted the attention of the peasant. After a moment’s
search he found, although he did not recognise, the cause of his
dog’s terror; and, casting it upon his loaded cart, bore it to the
same church whereat but a few hours before the living sovereign
had determined to glut his fierce eyes with the death-pangs of his
fellow-man. Strange are the ways of Providence. That destined man
lived after his intended torturer! And, stranger yet, freed from his
bonds, that he might minister unto the slaughter of that self-same
torturer, he found his purpose frustrate--frustrate, as it were, by its
accomplishment--his meditated deed anticipated, his desperate revenge
forestalled.--“Verily, vengeance is mine,” saith the Lord, “and I will
repay it.”




THE SAXON PRELATE’S DOOM.

    “Die, prophet, in thy speech!”--KING HENRY VI.


The mightiest monarch of his age, sovereign of England--as his proud
grandsire made his vaunt of yore--by right of the sword’s edge; grand
duke of Normandy, by privilege of blood; and liege lord of Guienne, by
marriage with its powerful heritress; the bravest, the most fortunate,
the wisest of the kings of Europe, Henry the Second, held his court
for the high festival of Christmas in the fair halls of Rouen. The
banquet was already over, the revelry was at the highest, still,
the gothic arches ringing with the merriment, the laughter, and the
blended cadences of many a minstrel’s harp, of many a trouvere’s lay.
Suddenly, while the din was at the loudest, piercing through all the
mingled sounds, a single trumpet’s note was heard--wailing, prolonged,
and ominous--as was the chill it struck to every heart in that bright
company--of coming evil. During the pause which followed, for at that
thrilling blast the mirth and song were hushed as if by instinct--a
bustle might be heard below, the tread of many feet, and the discordant
tones of many eager voices. The great doors were thrown open, not with
the stately ceremonial that befitted the occasion, but with a noisy
and irreverent haste that proved the urgency or the importance of the
new-comers. Then, to the wonder of all present, there entered--not in
their wonted pomp, with stole, and mitre, crozier dalmatique and ring,
but in soiled vestments, travel-worn and dusty, with features haggard
from fatigue, and sharpened by anxiety and fear--six of the noblest
of old England’s prelates, led by the second dignitary of the church,
York’s proud archbishop. Hurrying forward to the dais, where Henry
sat in state, they halted all together at the step, and in one voice
exclaimed:--

“Fair sir, and king, not for ourselves alone, but for the holy church,
for your own realm and crown, for your own honor, your own safety, we
beseech you--”

“What means this, holy fathers?” Henry cried, hastily, and half
alarmed, as it would seem, by the excited language of the churchmen.
“What means this vehemence--or who hath dared to wrong ye, and for why?”

“For that, at your behest, we dared to crown the youthful king, your
son! Such, sire, is our offence. Our wrong--that we your English
prelates are excommunicated, and--”

“Now, by the eyes of God!”[A] exclaimed the king, breaking abruptly in
upon the bishop’s speech, his noble features crimsoned by the indignant
blood, that rushed to them at mention of this foul affront, “Now, by
the eyes of God, if all who have consented to his consecration be
accursed, then am I so myself!”

    [A] For this strange but authentic oath, see Thierry’s “Norman
        Conquest,” whence most of these details are taken.

“Nor is this all,” replied the prelate, well pleased to note the
growing anger of the sovereign, “nor is this all the wrong. The same
bold man, who did you this affront, an’ you look not the sharper, will
light a blaze in England that shall consume right speedily your royal
crown itself. He marches to and fro, with troops of horse, and bands of
armed footmen, stirring the Saxon churls against the gentle blood of
Normandy, nay, seeking even to gain entrance into your garrisons and
castles.”

“Do I hear right,” shouted the fiery prince, striking his hand upon
the board with such fierce vehemence, that every flask and tankard
rang. “Do I hear right--and is it but a dream that I am England’s king?
What! _one_ base vassal; _one_ who has fattened on the bread of our
ill-wasted charity; _one_ beggar, who first came to our court with all
his fortunes on his back, bestriding a galled, spavined jade; _one_
wretch like this insult at once a line of sovereign princes--trample
a realm beneath his feet--and go unpunished and scathe-free? What!
was there not one man, one only, of the hordes of recreant knights
who feast around my board, to free his monarch from a shaveling who
dishonors and defies him? Break off the feast--break off, I say! no
time for revelry and wine!--To council, lords, to council! We must
indeed bestir us, an’ we would hold the crown our grandsire won, not
for himself alone, nor for his race--who, by God’s grace, will wear it,
spite priest, cardinal, or pope--but for the gentle blood of Norman
chivalry!”

Rising at once, he led the way to council; and, with wild haste and
disarray, the company dispersed. But as the hall grew thin, four
knights remained behind in close converse--so deep, so earnest, that
they were left alone, when all the rest, ladies, and cavaliers, and
chamberlains, and pages, had departed, and the vast gallery, which
had so lately rung with every various sound of human merriment, was
silent as the grave. There was a strange and almost awful contrast
between the strong and stately forms of the four barons--their deep
and energetic whispers, the fiery glances of their angry eyes, the
fierce gesticulations of their muscular and well-turned limbs--and the
deserted splendors of that royal hall: the vacant throne, the long
array of seats; the gorgeous plate, flagons, and cups, and urns of gold
and marquetry; the lights still glowing, as it were, in mockery over
the empty board; the wine unpoured--the harps untouched and voiceless.

“Be it so--be it so!” exclaimed, in louder tones than they had used
before, one, the most striking in appearance of the group; “be it
so--let us swear! Richard le Breton, Hugues de Morville, William de
Traci--even as I shall swear, swear ye--by God, and by our trusty
blades, and by our Norman honor!”

“We will,” cried all, “we swear! we be not recreant, nor craven, as our
good swords shall witness!”

“Thus, then,” continued the first speaker, drawing his sword, and
grasping a huge cup of wine, “thus, then, I, Reginald Fitz-Urse, for
mine own part, and for each one and all of ye, do swear--so help me
God and our good Lady!--never to touch the winecup; never to bend
before the shrine; never to close the eyes in sleep; never to quit the
saddle, or unbelt the brand; never to pray to God; never to hope for
heaven--until the wrong we reck of be redressed!--until the insult done
our sovereign be avenged!--until the life-blood of his foeman stream on
our battle-swords as streams this nobler wine!”

Then, with the words--for not he only, but each one of the four,
holding their long, two-handed blades extended at arms’ length before
them with all their points in contact, and in the other hand grasping
the brimming goblets, had gone through, in resolute, unflinching tones,
the fearful adjuration--then, with the words, they all dashed down the
generous liquor on the weapons, watched it in silence as it crimsoned
them from point to hilt, and sheathing them, all purple as they were,
hurried, not from the hall alone, but from the palace; mounted their
fleetest war-steeds, and, that same night, rode furiously away toward
the nearest sea.

The fifth day was in progress after King Henry’s banquet, when, at
the hour of noon, four Norman knights, followed by fifty men-at-arms,
sheathed cap-à-pie in mail, arrayed beneath the banner of Fitz-Urse,
entered the town of Canterbury at a hard gallop. The leaders of the
band alone were clad in garbs of peace, bearing no weapon but their
swords, and singularly ill-accoutred for horse-exercise, being attired
in doublets of rich velvet, with hose of cloth of gold or silver, as if
in preparation for some high and festive meeting. Yet was it evident
that they had ridden miles in that unsuitable apparel; for the rich
velvet was besmeared with many a miry stain, and the hose dashed with
blood, which had been drawn profusely by the long rowels of their
gilded spurs.

Halting in serried order at the market-cross, the leader of the party
summoned, by an equerry, the city mayor to hear the orders of the
king; and, when that officer appeared--having commanded him, “on his
allegiance, to call his men to arms, and take such steps as should
assuredly prevent the burghers of the town from raising any tumult on
that day, whate’er might come to pass”--with his three friends, and
twelve, the stoutest, of the men-at-arms who followed in their train,
rode instantly away to the archbishop’s palace.

The object of their deadly hatred, when the four knights arrived,
was in the act of finishing his noonday meal; and all his household
were assembled at the board, from which he had just risen. There was
no sign of trepidation, no symptom of surprise, much less of fear or
consternation, in his aspect or demeanor, as one by one his visitors
stalked unannounced into the long apartment. Yet was there much indeed
in the strange guise wherein they came--in their disordered habits,
in the excitement visibly depicted on their brows, haggard from want
of sleep, pale with fatigue and labor, yet resolute, and stern, and
terse, with the resolve of their dread purpose--to have astonished,
nay, dismayed the spirit of one less resolute in the defence of what
he deemed the right than Thomas à-Becket. Silently, one by one, they
entered, the leader halting opposite the prelate, with his arms
folded on his breast, and his three comrades forming as it were in a
half-circle around him. Not one of them removed the bonnet from his
brow, or bowed the knee on entering, or offered any greeting, whether
to the temporal rank or spiritual station of their intended victim; but
gazed on him with a fixed sternness that was far more awful than any
show of violence. This dumb-show, although it needs must occupy some
time in the description, had lasted perhaps a minute, when the bold
prelate broke the silence, addressing them in clear, harmonious tones,
and with an air as dignified and placid as though he had been bidding
them to share the friendly banquet.

“Fair sirs,” he said, “I bid ye welcome; although, in truth, the manner
of your entrance be not in all things courteous, nor savoring of that
respect which should be paid, if not to me--who am but as a worm, the
meanest of HIS creatures--yet to the dignity whereunto HE has raised
me! Natheless, I bid ye hail! Please ye disclose the business whereon
ye now have come to me.”

Still not a word did they reply--but seated themselves all unbidden,
still glaring on him with fixed eyes, ominous of evil. At length
Fitz-Urse addressed him, speaking abruptly, and in tones so hoarse and
hollow--the natural consequence of his extreme exertions, four days and
nights having been actually passed in almost constant travel--that his
most intimate associate could not have recognised his voice.

“We come,” he said, “on the king’s part, to take--and that, too,
on the instant--some order with your late proceedings: to have the
excommunicated presently absolved; to see the bishops, who have been
suspended, forthwith re-established; and to hear what _you_ may now
allege concerning your design against your sovereign lord and master!”

“It is not I,” Thomas replied, still calmer and more dignified than the
fierce spirits who addressed him, “it is not I who have done this. It
is the sovereign pontiff, God’s own supreme vicegerent, who, of his
own will, excommunicated my late brother of York. He alone, therefore,
can absolve him. I have no power in’t. As for the rest, let them but
make submission, and straightway shall they be restored!”

“From whom, then,” Reginald Fitz-Urse demanded, “from whom, then, hold
you your archbishopric--from England’s king, or from the pope of Rome?”

“My spiritual rights, of God and of the pope--my temporal privileges,
of the king,” was the prompt answer.

“The king, then, gave you _not_?” the baron asked again. “Beware, I
warn you, beware how you do answer me: the king, I say, gave you _not_
ALL that you enjoy?”

“He did not,” answered Becket, without moving a single muscle of his
composed but haughty countenance; although, at the reply, the fiery
temper of his unwelcome visiters was made more clearly manifest, as
a deep, angry murmur burst simultaneously from all their lips, and
they wrung with fierce gestures their gloved hands, as if it was with
difficulty they restrained themselves from violence more open in its
character.

“Ye threaten me, I well believe,” exclaimed the stately prelate, “but
it is vain and useless. Were all the swords in England brandished
against my head, ye should gain nothing, nothing from me.”

“We will do more than threaten,” answered Fitz-Urse; and rising from
his seat, rushed out of the apartment, followed by his companions,
crying aloud, even before they crossed the threshold, “To-arms,
Normans, to-arms!”

The doors were closed behind them, and barred instantly with the most
jealous care; while Reginald and the conspirators, meeting the guard
whom they had left without, armed themselves cap-à-pie in the courtyard
before the palace-gates, as if for instant battle, with helmet,
hood-of-mail, and hauberk; their triangular steel-plated shields
hanging about their necks; their legs protected by mail-hose, fitting
as closely and as flexible as modern stockings; their huge two-handed
swords belted about them in such fashion, that their cross-guarded
hilts came over their left shoulders, while their points clanked
against the spur on their right heels.

There was no pause; for, snatching instantly an axe from the hands
of a carpenter who chanced to be at work in the courtyard, Fitz-Urse
assailed the gate. Strong as it was, it creaked and groaned beneath
the furious blows, and the long corridors within rolled back the
threatening sounds in deep and hollow echoes. Within the palace all was
confusion and dismay, and every face was pale and ghastly, save his
alone who had the cause for fear.

“Fly! fly, my lord!” cried the assistants, breathless with terror; “fly
to the altar! There, there, at least, shall you be safe!”

“Never!” the prelate answered, his bold spirit as self-possessed and
calm in that most imminent peril as though he had been bred from
childhood upward to the performance of high deeds and daring; “never
will I turn back from that which I have set myself to do! God, if it be
his pleasure, shall preserve me from yet greater straits than these;
and if it be not so his will to do, then God forbid I should gainsay
him!” Nor would he stir one foot, until the vesper-bell, rung by the
sacristan, unwitting of his superior’s peril, began to chime from the
near walls of the cathedral. “It is the hour,” he quietly observed, on
hearing the sweet cadence of the bells, “it is the hour of prayer; my
duty calls me. Give me my vestments--carry my cross before me!” And,
attiring himself as though nothing of unusual moment were impending, he
traversed, with steps even slower than his wont, the cloister leading
from his dwelling to the abbey; though, ere he left the palace, the
din of blows had ceased, and the fierce shout of the assailants gave
token that the door had yielded. Chiding his servitors for their
excess of terror, as unworthy of their sacred calling, he still walked
slowly onward, while the steel-shod footsteps of his foemen might be
heard clashing on the pavement but a few yards behind him. He reached
the door of the cathedral; entered without casting so much as one
last glance behind; passed up the nave, and going up the steps of the
high altar, separated from the body of the church by a slight rail of
ornamental iron-work, commenced the service of the day.

Scarcely had he uttered the first words, when Reginald, sheathed, as
has been heretofore described, in complete panoply, with his two-handed
sword already naked, rushed into the cathedral.

“To me!” he cried, with a fierce shout, “to me, valiant and loyal
servants of the king!” while close behind him followed, in like array,
with flashing eyes, and inflamed visages, and brandished weapons, his
sworn confederates; and without the gates their banded men-at-arms
stood in a serried circle, defying all assistance from the town.
Again his servitors entreated Becket to preserve himself, by seeking
refuge in the dark crypts beneath the chancel, where he might rest
concealed in absolute security until the burghers should be aroused
to rescue; or by ascending the intricate and winding turret-stairs to
the cathedral-roof, whence he might summon aid ere he could possibly
be overtaken: but it was all in vain. Confiding in the goodness of his
cause, perhaps expecting supernatural assistance, the daring prelate
silenced their prayers by a contemptuous refusal; and even left the
altar, to prevent one of the monks from closing the weak, trellised
gates, which marked the holiest precincts. Meanwhile, unmoved in their
fell purpose, the Normans were at hand.

“Where is the traitor?” cried Fitz-Urse, but not a voice replied;
and the unwonted tones were vocal yet beneath the vaulted roof in
lingering echoes, when he again exclaimed, “Where--where is the
archbishop?”

“Here stands he,” Becket answered, drawing his lofty person up to its
full height, and spreading his arms forth with a gesture of perfect
majesty. “Here stands he, but no traitor! What do ye in God’s house in
such apparel? what is your will, or purpose?”

“That you die, presently!” was the reply, enforced by the uplifted
weapon and determined features of the savage baron.

“I am resigned,” returned the prelate, the calm patience of the martyr
blent with a noble daring that would have well become a warrior on the
battle-field. “Ye shall not see me fly before your swords! But in the
name of the all-powerful God, whom ye dishonor and defy, I do command
ye injure no one of my companions, layman or priest.” His words were
interrupted by a heavy blow across his shoulders, delivered, with the
flat of his huge sword, by Reginald.

“Fly!” he said, “fly, priest, or you are dead!” But the archbishop
moved not a step, spoke not a syllable. “Drag him hence, comrades,”
continued the last speaker; “away with him beyond the threshold--we may
not smite him here!”

“Here--here, or nowhere!” the archbishop answered--“here, in the very
presence, and before the altar, and the image, of our God!” And, as he
spoke, he seized the railings with both hands, set his feet firm, and,
being of a muscular and powerful frame, sustained by daring courage and
highly-wrought excitement, he succeeded in maintaining his position, in
spite of the united efforts of the four Norman warriors.

Meanwhile, all the companions of the prelate had escaped, by ways
known only to themselves--all but one faithful follower--the Saxon,
Edward Grim, his cross-bearer since his first elevation to the see of
Canterbury--the same who had so boldly spoken out after the conference
of Clarendon; and the conspirators began to be alarmed lest, if their
purpose were not speedily accomplished, the rescue should arrive and
frustrate their intentions. Their blood, moreover, was heated by the
struggle; and their fierce natures, never much restrained by awe or
reverence for things divine, burst through all bonds.

“Here, then, if it so please you!--here!” cried William de Traci,
striking, as he spoke, a blow with the full sweep of both his arms
wielding his ponderous weapon, at the defenceless victim’s head. But
the bold Saxon suddenly stretched out his arm to guard his beloved
master. Down came the mighty blow--but not for that did the true
servitor withdraw his naked limb--down came the mighty blow, and lopped
the unflinching hand, sheer as the woodman’s bill severs the hazel-twig!

Still, Becket stood unwounded. “Strike! strike, you others!” shouted
the Norman, as he grasped the maimed but still-resolved protector of
his master, and held him off by the exertion of his entire strength;
“strike! strike!” And they did strike, fearlessly--mercilessly! Hugues
de Morville smote him with a mace upon his temples, and he fell,
stunned, but still alive, face downward on the pavement; and Reginald
Fitz-Urse, whirling his espaldron around his head, brought it down with
such reckless fury upon the naked skull, that the point clove right
through it, down to the marble pavement, on which it yet alighted with
a degree of violence so undiminished, that it was shivered to the very
hilt, and the strong arms of him who wielded it were jarred up to the
shoulders, as if by an electric shock. One of the men-at-arms, who had
rushed in during the struggle, spurned with his foot the motionless and
senseless clay.

“Thus perish all,” he said, “all foemen of the king, and of the gentle
Normans--all who dare, henceforth, to arouse the base and slavish
Saxons against their free and princely masters!”

Thus fell the Saxon prelate, ruthlessly butchered at the very shrine
of God--not so much that he was a Romish priest, and an upholder
of the rights of Rome, as that he was a Saxon-man, a vindicator of
the liberties of England! Yet, though the pope absolved that king
whose cruel will had, in truth, done the deed, yet was that deed not
unavenged. If the revolt and treachery of all most dear to him, the
hatred of his very flesh and blood, the unceasing enmity of his own
sons, a miserable old age, and a heart-broken death-bed--if these
things may be deemed Heaven’s vengeance upon murder--then, of a surety,
that murder was avenged!




THE FATE OF THE BLANCHE NAVIRE.[B]

   “The bark that held a prince went down,
      The sweeping waves rolled on,
    And what was England’s glorious crown
      To him who wept a son?”--HEMANS.


The earliest dawning of a December’s morning had not yet tinged the
eastern sky, when in the port of Barfleur the stirring bustle which
precedes an embarkation broke loudly on the ear of all who were on
foot at that unseemly hour; nor were these few in number, for all
the population of that town--far more considerable than it appears
at present, when mightier cities, some rendered so by the gigantic
march of commerce, some by the puissant and creative hands of military
despotism, have sprung on every side into existence, and overshadowed
its antique renown--were hastening through the narrow streets toward
the water’s edge. The many-paned, stone-latticed casements gleamed with
a thousand lights, casting a cheerful glare over the motley multitude
which swarmed before them with all the frolic merriment of an unwonted
holyday. All classes and all ranks might there be seen, of every age
and sex: barons and lords of high degree, clad in the rich attires of
a half-barbarous yet gorgeous age, mounted on splendid horses, and
attended by long retinues of armed and liveried vassals; ladies and
demoiselles of birth and beauty curbing their Spanish jennets, and
casting sidelong looks of love toward the favored knights curveting in
the conscious state of proud humility beside their bridle-reins--as
clearly visible as at high noon, in the broad radiance of the torches
that accompanied their progress; while all around them and behind
crowded the humbler throng of mariners and artisans, with here a solemn
burgher, proud in his velvet pourpoint and his golden chain, and there
a barefoot monk, far prouder in his frock of sackcloth and his knotted
girdle; and ever and anon a group of merry maidens, with their high
Norman caps and short jupons of parti-colored serge, crowding around
the _jongleur_[C] with his ape and gittern--or pressing on to hear the
loftier professor[D] of the _gai-science_, girded with sword and dagger
in token of his gentle blood, and followed by his boy bearing the harp,
which then had power to win, not with the low-born and vulgar throng,
but with the noble and the fair, high favor for its wandering master!

    [B] The title given by the chroniclers to this ill-fated
        vessel is “The Blanche _Nef_,” the latter word being the
        old French for the modern term, which we have substituted.
        Singularly enough, the ancient word survives as the name
        of a piece of antique gold plate modelled like a ship, in
        which the napkins of the royal table are served in the high
        ceremonials of the court of France.

    [C] The juggler of the middle ages, who, like the
        street-musicians of the present time, were mostly Savoyards
        by birth, generally carried with them the ape or marmoset,
        even to this day their companion, and added to their feats
        of strength and sleight of hand both minstrelsey and music.

    [D] The _gai-science_, so early as the commencement of the
        century of which we write, had its degrees, its colleges,
        and its professors, who, though itinerants, and dependent
        for their subsistence on their instrument and voice,
        considered war no less their trade than song, esteeming
        themselves, and moreover admitted by others to be, in the
        fullest sense, gentlemen.

The courts and thoroughfares of the old town--for it was old even
then--by slow degrees grew silent and deserted; and, ere the sun was
well above the wave, the multitudes which thronged them had rolled
downward to the port, and stood in dense ranks gazing on its calm
and sheltered basin. Glorious indeed and lovely was the sight when
the first yellow rays streamed over the still waters: they waked the
distant summits of the hills behind the town into a sudden life;
they kissed the crest of every curling ripple that dimpled with its
“innumerable laughter” the azure face of ocean; but, more than all,
they seemed to dwell upon two noble barks, which lay, each riding at a
single anchor, at a short arrow-shot from the white sands that girt as
with a silver frame the liquid mirror of the harbor.

Fashioned by the best skill of that early day, and ornamented with
the most lavish splendor, though widely different from the floating
castles of modern times, those vessels--the picked cruisers of the
British navy--were in their structure no less picturesque than in their
decoration royally magnificent. Long, low, and buoyant, they floated
lightly as birds upon the surface; their open waists already bristling
with the long oars by which, after the fashion of the Roman galley,
they were propelled in serene weather; their masts clothed with the
wings which seemed in vain to woo the breeze; their elevated sterns
and forecastles blazing with tapestries of gold and silver, reflected
in long lines of light, scarcely broken by the dancing ripples. The
larger of the two bore on her foresail, blazoned in gorgeous heraldry,
the arms of England. The second, somewhat smaller, but if anything more
elegant in her proportions, and fitted with a nicer taste, although
less sumptuous, was painted white from stem to stern; her oars, fifty
in number, of the same spotless hue, were barred upon the blades with
silver; and on her foresail of white canvass, overlaid with figured
damask, were wrought, among a glittering profusion of devices, in
characters of silver, the words “La Blanche Navire.” Beyond them,
in the outer bay, a dozen ships or more were dimly seen through the
mist-wreaths which the wintry sun was gradually scattering--their
canvass hanging in festoons from their long yard-arms, and their decks
crowded, not with mariners alone, but with the steel-clad forms of
men-at-arms and archers, the gallant train of the third Norman who had
swayed the destinies of England.

The youngest son of the sagacious Conqueror, after the death of the
“Red king,” by a rare union of audacity and cunning, Henry, had seized
the sceptre of the fair island--the hereditary right of his romantic,
generous, and gallant brother, who with the feudatories of his Norman
duchy was waging war upon the Saracen, neglectful of his own and of his
subjects’ interests alike, beneath the burning sun of Syria. Already
firmly seated in his usurped dominion ere Robert returned homeward,
nor yet contented with his ill-gained supremacy, he had wrung from
the bold crusader, partly by force but more by fraud, his continental
realms; and adding cruelty which scarcely can be conceived to violence
and fraud, deprived him of Heaven’s choicest blessing, sight, and cast
him--of late the most renowned and glorious knight in Christendom--a
miserable, eyeless captive into the towers of Cardiff, his dungeon
while he lived, and after death his tomb!

No retributive justice had discharged its thunders upon the guilty
one; no gloom sat on his smooth and lordly brow, no thorns had lurked
beneath the circle of Henry’s blood-bought diadem. Fortune had
smiled on every effort; had granted every wish, however wild; had
sanctioned every enterprise, however dubious or desperate: he never
had known sorrow; and from his restless, energetic soul, remorse and
penitence were banished by the incessant turmoil of ambition and the
perpetual excitement of success. And now his dearest wish had been
accomplished--the most especial aim and object of his life perfected
with such absolute security, that his insatiate soul was satisfied.
Absolute lord of England, and undisputed ruler of the fair Cotentin,
he had of late disarmed the league which for a time had threatened
his security; detaching from the cause of France the powerful count
of Anjou, whose daughter--the most lovely lady and the most splendid
heiress of the time--he had seen wedded to his first-born and his
favorite, William. The previous day he had beheld the haughty barons
tender the kiss of homage and swear eternal loyalty to the young heir
of England, Normandy, and Anjou; the previous night he had sat glad
and glorious at the festive board, encompassed by all that was fair,
and noble, and high-born, in the great realms he governed, and among
all that proud and graceful circle his eye had looked on none so brave
and beautiful as that young, guiltless pair for whom he had imbrued,
not his hands only, but his very soul, in blood! He sat on the high
dais, beneath the gilded canopy; and as he quaffed the health of those
who had alone a kindly tenure of his cold and callous heart, a noble
knight approached with bended knee, and placing in his hand a mark
of gold--“Fair sir,” he said, “I, a good knight and loyal--Thomas
Fitz-Stephen--claim of your grace a boon. My father, Stephen
Fitz-Evrard, served faithfully and well, as long as he did live, your
father William--served him by sea, and steered the ship with his own
hand which bore him to that glorious crown which he right nobly won
at Hastings. I pray you, then, fair king, that you do sell to me, for
this gold mark, the fief I crave of you: that, as Fitz-Evrard served
the first King William, so may Fitz-Stephen serve the first King Henry.
I have right nobly fitted--ay, on mine honor, as beseems a mighty
monarch--here, in the bay of Barfleur, ‘the Blanche Navire.’ Receive it
at my hands, great sir, and suffer me to steer you homeward; and so may
the blessed Virgin and her Son send us the winds which we would have!”

“Good knight and loyal,” answered the prince, as he received the
proffered coin, “grieved am I, of a truth, and sorrowful, that
altogether I may not confer on you the fief which of good right you
claim: for lo! the bark is chosen--nay, more, apparelled for my
service--which must to-morrow, by Heaven’s mercy, bear me to that land
whither your sire so fortunately guided mine. But since it may not be
that I may sail myself, as would I could do so, in your good bark, to
your true care will I intrust what I hold dearer than my very soul--my
sons, my daughters--mine and my country’s hope; and as your father
steered the FIRST, so shall you steer the THIRD King William, that
shall be, to the white cliffs of England!”

“Well said, my liege!” cried Foulke, the count of Anjou, a
noble-looking baron of tall and stately presence, although far past the
noon of manhood, the father of the lovely bride; “to better mariner or
braver ship than stout Fitz-Stephen and La Blanche Navire, was never
freight intrusted! Quaff we a full carouse to their blithe voyage! How
sayest thou, daughter mine,” he added, turning to the blushing girl,
who sat attired in all the pomp of newly-wedded royalty beside her
youthful lover--“how sayest thou? wouldst desire a trustier pilot, or a
fleeter galley?”

“Why,” she replied, with a smile half-sweet, half-sorrowful, while
a bright tear-drop glittered in her eye--“why should I seek for
fleetness, when that same speed will but the sooner bear me from the
sight of our fair France, and of thee, too, my father?”

“Dost thou, then, rue thy choice?” whispered the ardent voice of
William in her ear; “and wouldst thou tarry here, when fate and duty
summon me hence for England?”

Her full blue eye met his, radiant with true affection, and her slight
fingers trembled in the clasp of her young husband with a quick thrill
of agitation, and her lips parted, but the words were heard by none
save him to whom they were addressed; for, with the clang of beakers,
and the loud swell of joyous music, and the glad merriment of all the
courtly revellers, the toast of the bride’s father passed round the
gleaming board: “A blithe and prosperous voyage--speed to the Blanche
Navire, and joy to all who sail in her!”

Thus closed the festive evening, and thus the seal of destiny was set
upon a hundred youthful brows, foredoomed, alas! to an untimely grave
beneath the ruthless billows.

The wintry day wore onward; and, wintry though it was, save for a
touch of keenness in the frosty air, and for the leafless aspect of
the country, it might have passed for a more lightsome season; the sky
was pure and cloudless as were the prospects and the hopes of the gay
throng who now embarked secure and confident beneath its favorable
omens. The sun shone gayly as in the height of summer, and the blue
waves lay sleeping in its lustre as quietly as though they ne’er had
howled despair into the ears of drowning wretches! There was no thought
of peril or of fear--how should there be? The ships were trustworthy;
the seamen skilful, numerous, and hardy; the breezes fair, though
faint; the voyage brief; the time propitious.

The day wore onward; and it was high noon before the happy king--his
every wish accomplished, secure as he conceived himself, and firm in
the fruition of his blood-bought majesty--rowed with his glittering
train on board the royal galley. Loud pealed the cheering clamors of
his Norman subjects, bidding their sovereign hail; but louder yet
they pealed, when, with its freight of ladies, the second barge shot
forth--William and his fair sister, and yet fairer bride, and all the
loveliest of the dames that graced the broad Cotentin.

Not yet, however, were the anchors weighed--not yet were the sails
sheeted home; for on the deck of the king’s vessel, beneath an awning
of pure cloth-of-gold, a gorgeous board was spread. Not in the regal
hall of Westminster could more of luxury have been brought together
than was displayed upon that galley’s poop. Spread with the softest
ermine--meet carpet for the gentle feet that trod it--cushioned with
seats of velvet, steaming with perfumes the most costly, it was a scene
resembling more some fairy palace than the wave-beaten fabric that
had braved many a gale, and borne the flag of England through many a
storm in triumph. And there they sat and feasted, and the red wine-cup
circled freely, and the song went round: their hearts were high and
happy, and they forgot the lapse of hours; and still the reveller’s
shout was frequent on the breeze, and still the melody of female tones,
blent with the clang of instrumental music, rang in the ears of those
who loitered on the shore, after the sun had bathed his lower limb in
the serene and peaceful waters.

Then, as it were, awaking from their trance of luxury, the banqueters
broke off. Skiff after skiff turned shoreward, till none remained on
board the royal ship except the monarch and his train, and that loved
son with his bright consort, whom, parting from them there, he never
was to look upon again! The courses were unfurled, topsails were
spread, and pennants floated seaward; and, as the good ship gathered
way, the father bade adieu--adieu, as he believed it, but for one
little night--to all he loved on earth; and their barge, manned by
a score of powerful and active rowers, wafted the bridal party to
the Blanche Navire, which, as her precious freight drew nigh, luffed
gracefully and swiftly up to meet them, as though she were a thing of
life, conscious and proud of the high honor she enjoyed in carrying the
united hopes of Normandy and England.

Delay--there was yet more delay! The night had settled down upon the
deep before the harbor of Barfleur was fairly left behind; and yet so
lovely was the night--with the moon, near her full, soaring superbly
through the cloudless sky, and myriads on myriads of clear stars
weaving their mystic dance around her--that the young voyagers walked
to and fro the deck, rejoicing in the happy chance that had secured to
them so fair time for their excursion: and William sat aloof, with his
sweet wife beside him, indulging in those bright anticipations, those
golden dreams of happiness, which indeed make futurity a paradise to
those who have not learned, by the sad schoolings of experience, that
human life is but another name for human sorrow.

Fairer--the breeze blew fairer; and every sail was set and drawing,
and the light ripples burst with a gurgling sound like laughter about
the snow-white stem; and, still to waft them the more swiftly to their
home, fifty long oars, pulled well and strongly by as many nervous
arms, glanced in the liquid swell. The bubbles on the surface were
scarcely seen as they flashed by, so rapid was their course; and a
long wake of boiling foam glanced in the moonshine, till it was lost
to sight in the far distance. The port was far behind them; and the
king’s ship, seen faintly on the glimmering horizon, loomed like a pile
of vapor far on their starboard bow. And still the music rang upon
the favorable wind, and still the rowers sang amid their toil, and
still the captain sent the deep bowl round. The helmsman dozed upon
the tiller--the watch upon the forecastle had long since stretched
themselves upon the deck--in the deep slumbers of exhaustion and
satiety.

“Give way! my merry men, give way!” such was the jovial captain’s cry;
“pull for the pride of Normandy--pull for your country’s fame, men of
the fair Cotentin. What! will ye let yon island-lubbers outstrip ye in
the race? More way! more way!”

And with unrivalled speed the Blanche Navire sped on. A long black line
stretches before her bow, dotting the silvery surface with ragged and
fantastic shades; but not one eye has marked it! On she goes, swifter
yet and swifter, and still the fatal shout is ringing from her decks:
“Give way, men of Cotentin! give more way!” Now they are close upon
it, and now the dashing of the surf about the broken ledges--for that
black line is the dread Raz de Gatteville, the most tremendous reef
of all that bar the iron coast of Normandy! The hoarse and hollow roar
must reach the ears even of those who sleep. But no! the clangor of the
exulting trumpets, and the deep booming of the Norman nakir, and that
ill-omened shout, “Give way--yet more--more way!” has drowned even the
all-pervading roar of the wild breakers. On, on she goes, fleet as the
gazehound darting upon its antlered prey; and now her bows are bathed
by the upflashing spray; and now--hark to that hollow shock, that long
and grinding crash!--hark to that wild and agonizing yell sent upward
by two hundred youthful voices, up to the glorious stars that smiled
as if in mockery of their ruin. There rang the voice of the strong,
fearless men; the knight who had spurred oft his destrier amid the
shivering of lances and the rending clash of blades, without a thought
unless of high excitement and fierce joy; the mariner who, undismayed,
had reefed his sail, and steered his bark aright, amid the wildest
storm that ever lashed the sea to fury--now utterly unnerved and
paralyzed by the appalling change from mirth and revelry to imminent
and instant death.

So furious was the rate at which the galley was propelled, that, when
she struck upon the sharp and jagged rocks, her prow was utterly
stove inward, and the strong tide rushed in, foaming and roaring like
a mill-stream! Ten seconds’ space she hung upon the perilous ledge,
while the waves made a clear breach over her, sweeping not only every
living being, but every fixture--spars, bulwarks, shrouds, and the tall
masts themselves--from her devoted decks. At the first shock, with the
instinctive readiness that characterizes, in whatever peril, the true
mariner, Fitz-Stephen, rallying to his aid a dozen of the bravest of
his men, had cleared away and launched a boat; and, even as the fated
bark went down, bodily sucked into the whirling surf, had seized the
prince and dragged him with a stalwart arm into the little skiff, which
had put off at once, to shun the drowning hundreds who must have
crowded in and sunk her on the instant.

“Pull back!--God’s death!--pull back!” cried the impetuous youth,
as he looked round and saw that he alone of all his race was there;
“pull back, ye dastard slaves, or by the Lord and Maker of us all,
though ye escape the waves, ye ’scape not my revenge!”--and, as he
spoke, he whirled his weapon from the scabbard and pressed the point
so closely to Fitz-Stephen’s throat, that its keen temper razed the
skin; and, terrified by his fierce menaces, and yet more by the
resolute expression that glanced forth from his whole countenance,
they turned her head once more toward the reef, and shot into the
vortex, agitated yet and boiling, wherein the hapless galley had been
swallowed. A female head, with long, fair hair, rose close beside the
shallop’s stern, above the turbulent foam. William bent forward: he had
already clutched those golden tresses--a moment, and she would have
been enfolded in his arms--another head rose suddenly! another--and
another--and another! Twenty strong hands grappled the gunwale of the
skiff with the tenacity of desperation. There was a struggle, a loud
shout, a heavy plunge, and the last remnant of the Blanche Navire went
down, actually dragged from beneath the few survivors by the despairing
hands of those whom she could not have saved or succored had she been
of ten times her burden.

All, all went down! There was a long and awful pause, and then a slight
splash broke the silence, a faint and gurgling sigh, and a strong
swimmer rose and shook the brine from his dark locks; and lo, he was
alone upon the deep! Something he saw at a brief distance, distinct and
dark, floating upon the surface, and with a vigorous stroke he neared
it--a fragment of a broken spar. Hope quickened at his heart, and love
of life, almost forgotten in the immediate agony and terror, returned
in all its natural strength. He seized a rope, and by its aid reared
himself out of the abyss; and now he sat, securely as he deemed it,
upon a floating fragment on which, one little hour before, he would
not have embarked for all the wealth of India. Scarcely had he reached
his temporary place of safety, before another of the sufferers swam
feebly up and joined him, and then a third, the last of the survivors.
The first who reached the spar--it was no other than Fitz-Stephen--had
perused with an anxiety the most sickening and painful the faces of
the new-comers: he knew them, but they were not the features he would
have given his own life to see in safety--Berault, a butcher of Rouen,
and Godfrey, a renowned and gallant youth, the son of Gilbert, count
de L’Aigle. “The prince--where is the prince?” Fitz-Stephen cried to
each, as he arrived; “hast thou not seen the prince?” And each, in
turn, replied: “He never rose again--he, nor his brothers, nor his
sister, nor his bride, nor one of all their company!”--“Wo be to me!”
Fitz-Stephen cried, and letting go his hold, deliberately sank into the
whirling waters; and, though a strong man and an active swimmer, chose
to die with the victims whom his rashness had destroyed, rather than
meet the indignation of their bereaved father, and bear the agonies of
his own lifelong remorse.

Three days elapsed before the tidings reached King Henry, who in the
fearful misery of hope deferred had lingered on the beach, trusting to
hear that, from some unknown cause, the galley of his son might have
put back to Barfleur. On the third day, Berault, the sole survivor
of that night of misery, was brought in by a fishing-boat which had
preserved him; and, when he had concluded his narration, Robert of
Normandy had been revenged, although his wrongs had been a hundred-fold
more flagrant than they were. Henry, though he lived years, NEVER
SMILED AGAIN!




THE SAXON’S BRIDAL.


There are times in England when the merry month of May is not, as it
would now appear, merely a poet’s fiction; when the air is indeed mild
and balmy, and the more conspicuously so, that it succeeds the furious
gusts and driving hailstorms of the boisterous March, the fickle
sunshine and capricious rains of April. One of these singular epochs in
the history of weather it was in which events occurred, which remained
unforgotten for many a day, in the green wilds of Charnwood forest.

If was upon a soft, sweet morning, toward the latter end of the month,
and surely nothing more delicious could have been conceived by the
fancy of the poet. The low west wind was fanning itself among the
tender leaves of the new-budded trees, and stealing over the deep
meadows, all redolent with dewy wild flowers, waving them with a
gentle motion, and borrowing a thousand perfumes from their bosoms.
The hedgerows were as white with the dense blossoms of the hawthorn
as though they had been powdered over by an untimely snowstorm; while
everywhere along the wooded banks the saffron primrose and its sweet
sister of the spring, the violet, were sunning their unnumbered
blossoms in the calm warmth of the vernal sunshine. The heavens, of a
pure, transparent blue, were laughing with a genial lustre, not flooded
by the dazzling glare of midsummer, but pouring over all beneath
their influence a lovely, gentle light, in perfect keeping with the
style of the young scenery; and all the air was literally vocal with
the notes of innumerable birds, from the proud lark, “rejoicing at
heaven’s gate,” to the thrush and blackbird, trilling their full, rich
chants from every dingle, and the poor linnet, piping on the spray.
Nothing--no, nothing--can be imagined that so delights the fancy with
sweet visions, that so enthrals the senses, shedding its influences
even upon the secret heart, as a soft, old-fashioned May morning.
Apart from the mere beauties of the scenery--from the mere enjoyment
of the bright skies, the dewy perfumes that float on every breeze, the
mild, unscorching warmth--apart from all these, there is something
of a deeper and a higher nature in the thoughts called forth by the
spirit of the time; a looking forward of the soul to fairer things to
come; an excitement of a quiet hope within, not very definite, perhaps,
nor easily explained, but one which almost every man has felt, and
contrasted with the languid and pallid satiety produced by the full
heat of summer, and yet more with the sober and reflective sadness that
steals upon the mind as we survey the russet hues and the sere leaves
of autumn. It is as if the newness, the fresh youth of the season, gave
birth to a corresponding youth of the soul. Such are the sentiments
which many men feel now-a-days, besides the painter, and the poet, and
the soul-rapt enthusiast of nature: but those were iron days of which
we write, and men spared little time in thought from action or from
strife, nor often paused to note their own sensations, much less to
ponder on their origin or to investigate their causes.

The morning was such as we have described--the scene a spot of singular
beauty within the precincts of the then-royal forest of Charnwood, in
Leicestershire. A deep but narrow stream wound in a hundred graceful
turns through the rich meadow-land that formed the bottom of a small,
sloping vale, which had been partially reclaimed, even at that day,
from the waste; though many a willow-bush fringing its margin, and many
a waving ash, fluttering its delicate tresses in the air, betrayed the
woodland origin of the soft meadow. A narrow road swept down the hill,
with a course little less serpentine than that of the river below,
and crossed it by a small, one-arched stone bridge, overshadowed by a
gigantic oak-tree, and scaled the opposite acclivity in two or three
sharp, sandy zigzags. Both the hillsides were clothed with forest, but
still the nature of the soil or some accidental causes had rendered
the wood as different as possible; for, on the farther side of the
stream, the ground was everywhere visibly covered by a short, mossy
turf, softer and more elastic to the foot than the most exquisite
carpet that ever issued from the looms of Persia, and overshadowed
by huge and scattered oaks, growing so far apart that the eye could
range far between their shadowy vistas; while on the nearer slope--the
foreground, as it might be called, of the picture--all was a dense
and confused mass of tangled shrubbery and verdure. Thickets of old,
gnarled thorn-bushes, completely overrun and matted with woodbines;
coppices of young ash, with hazel interspersed, and eglantine and
dog-roses thickly set between; clumps of the prickly gorse and
plumelike broom, all starry with their golden flowerets, and fern so
wildly luxuriant, that in many places it would have concealed the head
of the tallest man, covered the ground for many a mile through which
the narrow road meandered.

There was one object more in view--one which spoke of man even in that
solitude, and man in his better aspect. It was the slated roof and
belfry, all overgrown with moss and stone-crop, of a small wayside
chapel, in the old Saxon architecture, peering out from the shadows
of the tall oaks which overhung it in the far distance. It was, as
we have said, very small, in the old Saxon architecture, consisting,
in fact, merely of a vaulted roof supported upon four squat, massy
columns, whence sprung the four groined ribs which met in the centre of
the arch. Three sides alone of this primitive place of worship, which
would have contained with difficulty forty persons, were walled in, the
front presenting one wide, open arch, richly and quaintly sculptured
with the indented wolf’s teeth of the first Saxon style. Small as it
was, however, the little chapel had its high altar, with the crucifix
and candle, its reading-desk of old black oak, its font, and pix, and
chalices, and all the adjuncts of the Roman ritual. A little way to the
left might be discovered the low, thatched eaves of a rustic cottage,
framed of the unbarked stems of forest-trees--the abode, probably,
of the officiating priest; and close beside the walls of the little
church a consecrated well, protected from the sun by a stone vault, of
architecture corresponding to the chapel.

Upon the nearer slope, not far from the roadside, but entirely
concealed from passers by the nature of the ground and the dense
thickets, there were collected, at an early hour of the morning, five
men, with as many horses, who seemed to be awaiting, in a sort of
ambush, some persons whom they would attack at unawares. The leader
of the party, as he might be considered, as much from his appearance
as from the deference shown to him by the others, was a tall, active,
powerful man, of thirty-eight or forty years, with a bold and
expressive countenance--expressive, however, of no good quality, unless
it were the fiery, reckless daring which blazed from his broad, dark
eye, and that was almost obscured by the cloud of insufferable pride
which lowered upon his frowning brow, and by the deep, scar-like lines
of lust, and cruelty, and scorn, which ploughed his weather-beaten
features. His dress was a complete suit of linked chain-mail--hauberk,
and sleeves, and hose--with shoes of plaited steel, and gauntlets
wrought in scale, covering his person from his neck downward in
impenetrable armor. He had large gilded spurs buckled upon his heels,
and a long, two edged dagger, with a rich hilt and scabbard, in his
belt; but neither sword, nor lance, nor any other weapon of offence,
except a huge steel mace, heavy enough to fell an ox at a single blow,
which he grasped in his right hand; while from his left hung the bridle
of a tall, coal-black Norman charger, which was cropping the grass
quietly beside him. His head was covered by a conical steel cap, with
neither crest, nor plume, nor visor, and mail-hood falling down from it
to protect the neck and shoulders of the wearer.

The other four were men-at-arms, clad all in suits of armor, but less
completely than their lord: thus they had steel shirts only, with
stout buff breeches and heavy boots to guard their lower limbs, and
iron skullcaps only, without the hood, upon their heads, and leather
gauntlets upon their hands; but, as if to make up for this deficiency,
they were positively loaded with offensive weapons. They had the long,
two-handed sword of the period belted across their persons, three
or four knives and daggers of various size and strength at their
girdles, great battle-axes in their hands, and maces hanging at their
saddle-bows. They had been tarrying there already several hours, their
leader raising his eyes occasionally to mark the progress of the sun as
he climbed up the azure vault, and muttering a brief and bitter curse
as hour passed after hour, and those came not whom he expected.

“Danian,” he said at length, turning to the principal of his followers,
who stood nearer to his person, and a little way apart from the
others--“Danian, art sure this was the place and day? How the dog
Saxons tarry! Can they have learned our purpose?”

“Surely not, surely not, fair sir,” returned the squire, “seeing that I
have mentioned it to no one, not even to Raoul, or Americ, or Guy, who
know no more than their own battle-axes the object of their ambush.
And it was pitch-dark when we left the castle, and not a soul has seen
us here; so it is quite impossible they should suspect--and hark! there
goes the bell; and see, sir, see--there they come, trooping through the
oak-trees down the hill!”

And indeed, as he spoke, the single bell of the small chapel began
to chime with the merry notes that proclaim a bridal, and a gay
train of harmless, happy villagers might be seen, as they flocked
along, following the footsteps of the gray-headed Saxon monk, who,
in his frock and cowl, with corded waist and sandalled feet, led the
procession. Six young girls followed close behind him, dressed in
blue skirts and russet jerkins, but crowned with garlands of white
May-flowers, and May-wreaths wound like scarfs across their swelling
bosoms, and hawthorn-branches in their hands, singing the bridal carol
in the old Saxon tongue, in honor of the pride of the village, the
young and lovely Marian. She was indeed the very personification of all
the poet’s dreams of youthful beauty--tall and slender in her figure,
yet exquisitely, voluptuously rounded in every perfect outline, with a
waist of a span’s circumference, wide, sloping shoulders, and a bust
that, for its matchless swell, as it struggled and throbbed with a
thousand soft emotions, threatening to burst from the confinement of
her tight-fitting jacket, would have put to shame the bosom of the
Medicean Venus. Her complexion, wherever the sun had not too warmly
kissed her beauties, was pure as the driven snow; while her large,
bright-blue eyes, red, laughing lip, and the luxuriant flood of sunny,
golden hair, which streamed down in wild, artless ringlets to her
waist, made her a creature for a prince’s, or more, a poet’s adoration.

But neither prince nor poet was the god of that fair girl’s idolatry,
but one of her own class, a Saxon youth, a peasant--nay, a serf--from
his very cradle upward the born thrall of Hugh de Mortemar, lord of
the castle and the hamlet at its foot, named, from its situation in
the depths of Charnwood, Ashby in the Forest. But there was now no
graven collar about the sturdy neck of the young Saxon, telling of
a suffering servitude; no dark shade of gloom in his full, glancing
eye; no sullen doggedness upon his lip: for he was that day, that
glad day, a freeman--a slave no longer--but free, free, by the gift
of his noble master; free as the wild bird that sung so loudly in the
forest; free as the liberal air that bore the carol to his ears. His
frock of forest-green and buskins of the untanned deer-hide set off his
muscular, symmetrical proportions, and his close-curled, short auburn
hair showed a well-turned and shapely head. Behind this gay and happy
pair came several maids and young men, two-and-two; and after these, an
old, gray-headed man, the father of the bride--and leaning on his arm
an aged matron, the widowed mother of the enfranchised bridegroom.

Merrily rang the gay, glad bells, and blithely swelled up the bridal
chorus as they collected on the little green before the ancient
arch, and slowly filed into the precincts of the forest shrine; but
very speedily their merriment was changed into dismay and terror and
despair, for scarcely had they passed into the sacred building, before
the knight, with his dark followers, leaped into their saddles, and
thundering down the hill at a tremendous gallop, surrounded the chapel
before the inmates had even time to think of any danger. It was a
strange, wild contrast, the venerable priest within pronouncing even
then the nuptial blessing, and proclaiming over the bright young pair
the union made by God, which thenceforth no man should dissever--the
tearful happiness of the blushing bride, the serious gladness of the
stalwart husband, the kneeling peasantry, the wreaths of innocent
flowers; and at the gate, the stern, dark men-at-arms, with their
scarred savage features, and their gold-gleaming harness and raised
weapons. A loud shriek burst from the lips of the sweet girl, as,
lifting her eyes to the sudden clang and clatter that harbingered those
dread intruders, she saw and recognised upon the instant the fiercest
of the Norman tyrants--dreaded by all his neighbors far and near, but
most by the most virtuous and young and lovely--the bold, bad baron
of Maltravers. He bounded to the earth as he reached the door, and
three of his followers leaped from their horses likewise, one sitting
motionless in his war-saddle, and holding the four chargers. “Hold,
priest!” he shouted, as he entered, “forbear this mummery; and thou,
dog Saxon, think not that charms like these are destined to be clasped
in rapture by any arms of thy slow, slavish race!” and with these words
he strode up to the altar, seemingly fearless of the least resistance,
while his men kept the door with brandished weapons. Mute terror seized
on all, paralyzed utterly by the dread interruption--on all but the
bold priest and the stout bridegroom.

“Nay, rather forbear thou, Alberic de Maltravers! These two are one for
ever--wo be to those who part them!”

“Tush, priest--tush, fool!” sneered the fierce baron, as he seized him
by the arm, and swinging him back rudely, advanced upon the terrified
and weeping girl, who was now clinging to the very rails of the high
altar, trusting, poor wretch, that some respect for that sanctity of
place which in old times had awed even heathens, might now prevail with
one whom no respect for anything divine or human had ever yet deterred
from doing his unholy will.

“Ha! dog!” cried he, in fiercer tones, that filled the chapel as
it were a trumpet, seeing the Saxon bridegroom lift up a heavy
quarter-staff which lay beside him, and step in quietly but very
resolutely in defence of his lovely wife--“Ha! dog and slave, dare you
resist a Norman and a noble?--back, serf, or die the death!” and he
raised his huge mace to strike him.

“No serf, sir, nor slave either,” answered the Saxon, firmly, “but a
freeman, by my good master’s gift, and a landholder.”

“Well, master freeman and landholder,” replied the other, with a bitter
sneer, “if such names please you better, stand back--for Marian lies on
no bed but mine this night--stand back, before worse come of it!”

“I will die rather,” was the answer.--“Then die! fool! die!” shouted
the furious Norman, and with the words he struck full at the bare brow
of the dauntless Saxon with his tremendous mace--it fell, and with
dint that would have crushed the strongest helmet into a thousand
splinters--it fell, but by a dexterous slight the yeoman swung his
quarter-staff across the blow, and parried its direction, although
the tough ash-pole burst into fifty shivers--it fell upon the carved
rails of the altar and smashed them into atoms; but while the knight,
who had been somewhat staggered by the impetus of his own misdirected
blow, was striving to recover himself, the young man sprang upon him,
and grappling him by the throat, gained a short-lived advantage.
Short-lived it was indeed, and perilous to him that gained--for
although there were men enough in the chapel, all armed with quarter
staves, and one or two with the genuine brown bill, to have overpowered
the four Normans, despite their war array--yet so completely were they
overcome by consternation, that not one moved a step to aid him; the
priest, who had alone showed any spark of courage, being impeded by the
shrieking women, who, clinging to the hem of his vestments, implored
him for the love of God to save them.

In an instant that fierce grapple was at an end, for in the twinkling
of an eye, two of the men-at-arms had rushed upon him and dragged him
off their lord.

“Now by the splendor of God’s brow,” shouted the enraged knight,
“thou art a sweet dog thus to brave thy masters. Nay, harm him not.
Raoul”--he went on--“harm not the poor dog,”--as his follower had
raised his battle-axe to brain him--“harm him not, else we should
raise the ire of that fool, Mortemar! Drag him out--tie him to the
nearest tree, and this good priest beside him--before his eyes we will
console this fair one.” And with these words he seized the trembling
girl, forcing her from the altar, and encircling her slender waist in
the foul clasp of his licentious arms. “And ye,” he went on, lashing
himself into fury as he continued,--“and ye churl Saxons, hence!--hence
dogs and harlots to your kennels!”

No farther words were needed, for his orders were obeyed by his own
men with the speed of light, and the Saxons overjoyed to escape on any
terms, rushed in a confused mass out of the desecrated shrine, and fled
in all directions, fearful of farther outrage. Meanwhile, despite the
struggles of the youth, and the excommunicating anathemas which the
priest showered upon their heads, the men-at-arms bound them securely
to the oak-trees, and then mounting their horses, sat laughing at their
impotent resistance, while with a refinement of brutality worthy of
actual fiends, Alberic de Maltravers bore the sweet wife clasped to his
iron breast, up to the very face of her outraged, helpless husband, and
tearing open all her jerkin, displayed to the broad light the whole of
her white, panting bosom, and poured from his foul, fiery lips a flood
of lustful kisses on her mouth, neck, and bosom, under the very eyes of
his tortured victim. To what new outrage he might have next proceeded,
must remain ever doubtful, for at this very instant the long and mellow
blast of a clearly-winded bugle came swelling through the forest
succeeded by the bay of several bloodhounds, and the loud, ringing
gallop of many fast approaching.

“Ha!” shouted he, “ten thousand curses on him! here comes De Mortemar.
Quick--quick--away! Here, Raoul, take the girl, buckle her tight to
your back with the sword-belt, and give me your twohanded blade; I lost
my mace in the chapel!--That’s right! quick! man--that’s right--now,
then, be off--ride for your life--straight to the castle; we will stop
all pursuit. Fare thee well, sweet one, for a while--we will conclude
hereafter what we have now commenced so fairly!”

And as he spoke, he also mounted his strong charger, and while the man,
Raoul, dashed his spurs rowel-deep into his horse’s flanks, and went
off at a thundering gallop, the other four followed him at a slower
pace, leaving the Saxons in redoubled anguish--redoubled by the near
hope of rescue.

But for once villany was not permitted to escape due retribution,
for ere the men-at-arms, who led the flight, had crossed the little
bridge, a gallant train came up at a light canter from the wood, twenty
or thirty archers, all with their long bows bent, and their arrows
notched and ready, with twice as many foresters on foot, with hounds of
every kind, in slips and leashes, and at their head a man of as noble
presence as ever graced a court or reined a charger. He was clad in a
plain hunting-frock of forest-green, with a black velvet bonnet and a
heron’s plume, and wore no other weapon but a light hunting-sword--but
close behind him rode two pages, bearing his knightly lance with its
long pennon, his blazoned shield, and his two-handed broadsword. It
was that brave and noble Norman, Sir Hugh de Mortemar. His quick eye
in an instant took in the whole of the confused scene before him, and
understood it on the instant.

“Alberic de Maltravers!” he cried, in a voice clear and loud as the
call of a silver trumpet, “before God he shall rue it,” and with the
words he snatched his lance from the page, and dashing spurs into his
splendid Spanish charger, thundered his orders out with the rapid
rush of a winter’s torrent. “Bend your bows, archers,--draw home your
arrows to the head! stand, thou foul ravisher, dishonest Norman, false
gentleman, and recreant knight! Stand on the instant, or we shoot!
Cut loose the yeoman from the tree, ye varlets, and the good priest.
Randal, cast loose the bloodhounds down to the bridge across yon knoll,
and lay them on the track of that flying scoundrel. Ha! they will meet
us.”

And so in truth they did; for seeing that he could not escape the
deadly archery, Alberic de Maltravers wheeled short on his pursuers,
and shouted his war-cry--“Saint Paul for Alberic!--false knight and
liar in your throat. Saint Paul! Saint Paul! charge home,”--and with
the words the steel-clad men-at-arms drove on, expecting by the weight
of their harness to ride down and scatter the light archery like
chaff. Unarmed although he was, De Mortemar paused not--not for a
moment!--but galloped in his green doublet as gallantly upon his foe
as though he had been sheathed in steel. He had but one advantage--but
one hope!--to bear his iron-clad opponent down at the lance point,
without closing--on! they came, on!--Maltravers swinging his twohanded
sword aloft, and trusting in his mail to turn the lance’s point--De
Mortemar with his long spear in rest--“Saint Paul! Saint Paul!”--they
met! the dust surged up in a dense cloud! the very earth appeared to
shake beneath their feet!--but not a moment was the conflict doubtful.
Deep! deep! throughed his linked mail, and through his leathern jerkin,
and through his writhing flesh, the grinded spear-head shove into his
bosom, and came out at his back, the ash-staff breaking in the wound.
Down he went, horse and man!--and down, at one close volley of the
gray goose shafts, down went his three companions!--one shot clear
through the brain by an unerring shaft--the others stunned and bruised,
their horses both slain under them. “Secure them,” shouted Hugh, “bind
them both hand and foot, and follow,”--and he paused not to look upon
his slain assailant, but galloped down the hill, followed by half his
train, the bloodhounds giving tongue fiercely, and already gaining on
the fugitive. It was a fearful race, but quickly over!--for though the
man-at-arms spurred desperately on, his heavy Norman horse, oppressed,
moreover, by his double load, had not a chance in competing with the
proud Andalusian of De Mortemar. Desperately he spurred on--but now the
savage hounds were up with him--they rushed full at the horse’s throat
and bore him to the earth--another moment, Raoul was a bound captive,
and Marian, rescued by her liege lord, and wrapped in his own mantle,
was clasped in the fond arms of her husband!

“How now, good priest,” exclaimed Sir Hugh, “are these two now fast
wedded?”

“As fast, fair sire, as the holy rites may wed them.”

“Then ring me, thou knave, Ringan, a death-peal! Thou, Gilbert, and
thou, Launcelot, make me three halters, quick--nay! four--the dead
knight shall swing, as his villany well merits, beside the living
knaves!--Sing me a death-chant, priest, for these are judged to death,
unhouselled and unshriven!”

Not a word did the ruffians answer, they knew that prayer was useless,
and with dark frowning brows, and dauntless bearing, they met their
fate, impenitent and fearless. For Marian begged their lives in vain.
De Mortemar was pitiless in his just wrath! And the spurs were hacked
from the heels of the dead knight, and the base halter twisted round
his cold neck, and his dishonored corpse hung up upon the very tree
to which he had bade bind the Saxon bridegroom. And the death-peals
were sung, and the death-hymn was chanted; and ere the sounds of either
had died away in the forest echoes, the three marauders writhed out
their villain souls in the mild air, and swung three grim and ghastly
monuments of a foul crime and fearful retribution--and this dread rite
consummated the Saxon’s bridal!




LEGENDS

OF

THE CRUSADERS.




THE SYRIAN LADY;

A SKETCH OF THE CRUSADES.

   “Yes, love indeed is light from heaven;
      A spark of that immortal fire
    With angels shared, by Allah given,
      To lift from earth our low desire.
    Devotion wafts the mind above,
    But heaven itself descends in love.”--THE GIAOUR.


There is something in the first approach of spring--in the budding of
the young leaves, the freshness increasing warmth and lustre of the
sun--as contrasted with the gloomy winter which has just departed,
that can not fail to awaken ideas of a gay and lively character in
all hearts accessible to the influences of gratitude and love. In
compliance, as it were, with this feeling, a custom has more or less
generally prevailed among all nations, and in all ages, of celebrating
the arrival of this season by merriment, and song, and rural triumph.
Like many others, admirable practices of the olden time, the setting
apart to joy and innocent festivity of the first of May is now
gradually falling into neglect; but at the period of which we are about
to treat, not Christmas itself could be observed with more reverential
care than its inviting rival. On May-day, the evergreens which had
decked the cottage and the church, the castle and the cloister, gave
way to garlands of such flowers as the mellowing influences of the
season had already called into their existence of beauty and perfume;
troops of morris-dancers paraded the public way with their fantastic
dresses, glittering blades, and intricate evolutions; feasting and
wassail, without which even pleasure itself was then deemed incomplete,
prevailed on every side; in the crowded city, or in the secluded
valley; in the hut of the serf, or in the turreted keep of his warlike
lord; in the gloom of the convent, or in the glitter of the court,
the same feelings were excited, the same animation glowed in every
countenance, the same triumphant demonstrations of joy hailed the glad
harbinger of sunshine and of summer.

In England, above all other lands--the merry England of antiquity--was
this pleasing festival peculiarly dear to all classes of society; at
all times a period eagerly anticipated, and rapturously enjoyed, never
perhaps was its arrival celebrated by all men with wilder revelry, with
more enthusiastic happiness, than on the year which had accomplished
the deliverance of their lion-hearted monarch from the chains of
perfidious Austria. It seemed to the whole nation as though, not only
the actual winter of the year, with his dark accompaniments of snow
and storm, but the yet more oppressive winter of anarchy and misrule,
of usurpation and tyranny, were about to pass away from the people,
which had so long groaned under the griping sway of the bad John, or
been torn by the savage strife of his mercenary barons; while their
legitimate and honored sovereign was dragging his dreary hours along
in the dungeon, from which he had but now escaped, through the devoted
fidelity and unrivalled art of the minstrel Blondel.

Now, however, the king was on the throne of his fathers, girt with a
circle of three gallant spirits, who had shed their blood like water
on the thirsty deserts of Syria; earning not only earthly honor and
renown, but, as their imperfect faith had taught them to believe, the
far more lofty guerdon of eternal life. Now their national festival had
returned--they were called upon by the thousand voices of nature to
give the rein to Pleasure, and why should they turn a deaf ear to her
inspiring call?

The streets of London--widely different indeed from the vast
wilderness of walls, which has risen like a phœnix from the ashes of
its predecessor, but even at that early age a vast and flourishing
town--were thronged, from the earliest dawn, by a constant succession
of smiling faces: old and young, men and maidens, grave citizens and
stern soldiers, all yielding to the excitement of the moment, all
hurrying from the intricate lanes of the city to greet their king, who
had announced his intention of holding a court at Westminster, and
proceeding thence, at high noon, to feast with the city dignitaries
in Guild-hall. The open stalls, which then occupied the place of
shops, were adorned by a display of their richest wares, decorated
with wreaths of a thousand bright colors;--steel harness from the
forges of Milan; rich velvets from the looms of Genoa; drinking-cups
and ewers of embossed gold, glittered in every booth. The projecting
galleries, which thrust forward their irregular gables far across the
narrow streets, were hung with tapestries of price; while garlands of
flowers, stretched from side to side, and the profusion of hawthorn
boughs, with their light green leaves and snowy blossoms, lent a sylvan
appearance to the crowded haunts of the metropolis. From space to space
the streets were guarded by the city-watch in their white cassocks and
glittering head-pieces; while ever and anon the train of some great
lord came winding its way, with led horses in costly caparison, squires
and pages in the most gorgeous fashion of the day, the banner and
the knightly armor of the baron borne before him, from his lodgings
in the Minories, or the more notorious Chepe. The air was literally
alive with music and light laughter; even the shaven and cowled
monk, as he threaded his way through the motley concourse--suffered
the gravity of his brow to relax into a smile when he looked upon the
undisguised delight of some fair girl, escorted by her trusty bachelor;
now stopping to gaze on the foreign curiosities displayed in decorated
stalls; now starting in affected terror from the tramp and snort of the
proud war-horse, or mustering a frown of indignation at the unlicensed
salutation of its courtly rider; now laughing with unsuppressed glee
at the strange antics of the _mummers_ and _morricers_, who, in every
disguise that fancy could suggest, danced and tumbled through the
crowded ways--heedless of the disturbance they excited, or the danger
they incurred from the hoofs of chargers which were prancing along in
constant succession, to display the equestrian graces and firm seat of
some young aspirant for the honors of chivalry.

The whole scene was in the highest degree picturesque, and such as no
other age of the world could afford. The happiness which, although
fleeting and fictitious, threw its bright illumination over the whole
multitude, oblivious of the cares, the labors, and the sorrows of
to-morrow, afforded a subject for the harp of the poet, no less worthy
his inspired meditations than the gorgeous coloring and the rich
costume of the middle ages might lend to the pencil of a Leslie or a
Newton.

In a chamber overlooking with its Gothic casements this scene of
contagious mirth--alone, unmoved by the gay hum which told of happiness
in every passing breeze--borne down, as it would appear, by the weight
of some secret calamity--sat Sir Gilbert à-Becket, of glorious form
and unblemished fame. The bravest of the brave on the battle-plain,
unequalled for wisdom in the hall of council, he had been among the
first of those bold hearts who had buckled on their mighty armor to
fight the good fight of Christianity--to rear the cross above the
crescent--and to redeem the Savior’s sepulchre from the contaminating
sway of the unbeliever.

There was not one among the gallant thousands who had followed their
lion-hearted leader from the green vales of England to the sultry sands
of Palestine, whose high qualities had been more frequently tried, or
whose undaunted valor was more generally acknowledged, than the knight
à-Becket; there was not one to whose lance the chivalrous Richard
looked more confidently for support, nor one to whose counsel he more
willingly inclined his ear. In the last desperate effort before the
walls of Ascalon--when, with thirty knights alone, the English monarch
had defied the concentrated powers, and vainly sought an opponent
in the ranks of sixty thousand mussulmans--his crest had shone the
foremost in those fierce encounters which have rendered the name of the
Melec Ric a terror to the tribes of the desert that has endured even to
the present day. It was at the close of this bloody encounter, that,
conquered by his own previous exertions rather than by the prowess of
his foemen--his armor hacked and rent, his war-steed slain beneath
him--he had been overwhelmed by numbers while wielding his tremendous
blade beside the bridle-rein of his king, and borne away by the
Saracens into hopeless captivity.

Days and months had rolled onward, and the limbs of the champion were
wasted and his constitution sapped by the vile repose of the dungeon;
yet never for an instant had his proud demeanor altered, or his high
spirit quailed beneath the prospect of an endless slavery. All means
had been resorted to by his turbaned captors to induce him to adopt the
creed of Mohammed. Threat of torments such as was scarcely endured even
by the martyrs of old; promises of dominion, and wealth, and honor;
the agonies of thirst and hunger; the allurement of beauty almost
superhuman--had been brought to assail the faith of the despairing but
undaunted prisoner: and each temptation had been tried but to prove
how unflinching was his resolution, and how implicit his faith in that
Rock of Ages which he had ever served with enthusiastic, at least, if
erring zeal, and with a fervency of love which no peril could shake, no
pleasure could seduce from its serene fidelity.

At length, when hope itself was almost dead within his breast; when
ransom after ransom had been vainly offered; when the noblest moslem
captives had been tendered in exchange for his inestimable head; and,
to crown the whole, when the no-longer united powers of the crusading
league had departed from the shores on which they had lavished so much
of their best blood--his deliverance from the fetters of the infidel
was accomplished by one of those extraordinary circumstances which the
world calls chance, but which the Christian knows how to attribute to
the infinite mercies of an overruling Providence. The eagerness of the
politic sultan--whose name ranks as high among the tribes of Islam as
the glory of his opponents among the pale sons of Europe--to obtain
proselytes from the nations which he had the sagacity to perceive were
no less superior to the wandering hordes of the desert in arts than in
arms, had led him to break through those laws which are so intimately
connected with the religion of Mohammed--the laws of the harem! As
the pious faith of the western warrior appeared to gain fresh vigor
from every succeeding temptation, so did the anxiety of his conqueror
increase to gain over to his cause a spirit the value of which was
daily rendered more and more conspicuous. In order to bring about this
end, after every other device had failed, he commanded the admission to
the Briton’s cell of the fairest maiden of his harem--a maid whose pure
and spotless beauty went further to prove her unblemished descent than
even the titles which were assigned to the youthful Leila, of almost
royal birth.

Dazzled by her charms, and intoxicated by the fascination of her
manner, her artless wit, and her delicate timidity, so far removed from
the unbridled passion of such other eastern beauties as had visited
his solitude, the Christian soldier betrayed such evident delight in
listening to her soft words, and such keen anxiety for a repetition of
the interview, that the oriental monarch believed that he had in sooth
prevailed. Confidently, however, as he had calculated on the conversion
of the believing husband by the unbelieving wife, the bare possibility
of an opposite result had never once occurred to his distorted vision.
But truly has it been said, “_Magna est veritas et prævalebit!_” The
damsel who had been sent to create emotion in the breast of another,
was the first to become its victim herself: she whose tutored tongue
was to have won the prisoner from the faith of his fathers, was herself
the first to fall away from the creed of her race. Enamored, beyond the
reach of description, of the good knight, whose attractions of person
were no less superior to the boasted beauty of the oriental nobles,
than his rich and enthusiastic mind soared above their prejudiced
understandings, she had surrendered her whole soul to a passion as
intense as the heat of her native climate; she had lent a willing ear
to the fervid eloquence of her beloved, and had drank in fresh passion
from the very language which had won her reason from the debasing
superstitions of Islamism to the bright and everlasting splendors of
the Christian faith. From this moment the eastern maid became the bride
of his affections, the solace of his weary hours, the object of his
brightest hopes. He had discovered that she was worthy of his love;
he was sure that her whole being was devoted to his welfare; and he
struggled no longer against the spirit with which he had battled, as
unworthy his country, his name, and his religion.

It was not long ere the converted maiden had planned the escape, and
actually effected the deliverance, of her affianced lover. She had
sworn to join him in his flight; she had promised to accompany him to
his distant country, and to be the star of his ascendant destinies,
as she had been the sole illuminator to his hours of desolation and
despair.

Rescued from his fetters, he had lain in concealment on the rocky
shores of the Mediterranean, anxiously awaiting the vessel which was
to convey him to the land of his birth, and her whose society alone
could render his being supportable. The vessel arrived: but what was
the agony of his soul on learning that she whom he prized above light,
and life, and all save virtue, had fallen a sacrifice to the furious
disappointment of her indignant countrymen! Maddened with grief, and
careless of an existence which had now become a burden rather than
a treasure, he would have returned to avenge the wrongs of his lost
Leila, and perish on her grave, had not her emissaries--conscious
that in such a case the fate which had befallen the mistress must
undoubtedly be theirs likewise--compelled him to secure their common
safety by flight.

After weary wanderings, he had returned a heart-stricken wretch to his
native England, at that moment rejoicing with unfeigned delight at the
recovery of her heroic king. He sometimes mingled in the labors of the
council or the luxuries of the banquet, but it was evident to all that
his mind was far away! that for him there might indeed be the external
semblance of joy, but that all within was dark and miserable! It was
plain that, in the words of the poet--

   “That heavy chill had frozen o’er the fountains of the tears,
    And though the eye may sparkle still, ’tis where the ice appears.”

On this morning of universal joy--to him a period fraught with the
gloomiest recollections, for it was the anniversary of that sad day on
which he had parted from the idol of his heart, never to behold her
more!--on this morning he had secluded himself from the sight of men;
he was alone with his memory! His eyes indeed rested on the letters of
an illuminated missal which lay open before him; but the long, dark
lock of silky hair which was grasped in his feverish hand, showed too
plainly that his grief was still of that harrowing and fiery character
which prevents the mind from tasting as yet the consolation
